The Smoots of Maryland and Virginia
Author: Harry Wright Newman
Call Number: R929.2 S6662

Newman, Harry Wright. The Smoots of Maryland and Virginia.
Washington D.C.: n.p., 1936. A genealogical history of
William Smute Boatright of Hampton, Virginia, and Pickawaxon,
Maryland, with a history of his descendants to the present generation. 
________________________________________

i


              THE SMOOTS OF MARYLAND AND VIRGINIA


iii


            This edition is limited to 250 copies
                   Your book is numbered


iv

                     [Illustration] 
           Colonel Benjamin Stoddert Smoot
          War of 1812 and Early Indian Campaigns

v

               THE SMOOTS OF MARYLAND
                     AND VIRGINIA

          A genealogical history of William Smute,
          Boatright, of Hampton, Virginia, and
          Pickawaxon, Maryland, with a history of
          his descendants to the present generation
                               
                         by
                HARRY WRIGHT NEWMAN

                    WASHINGTON, D. C.
                               1936


vi


                Harry Wright Newman
                 has also published
                Anne Arundel Gentry


vii


                           FOREWORD

THESE chronicles relating to William Smute and his descendants
were actually begun in the winter of 1922, when, as an idle and
recently university graduate, waiting to be placed as a wage earner
in the economic world, I occupied my leisure moments in seeking
knowledge of my forbears and to prove the tradition that had been
handed down from my elders. And during these fourteen years many
hours were spent in untiring research into musty, dusty, and ancient
as well as sometimes carelessly kept court records at more than fifty
county court houses, besides many additional hours were spent at home
in the attempt to untie numerous knots and to establish the parents
of many-a-fatherless Smoot. 

The loss of the three early registers of the Episcopal Parishes in
Charles County has not made it one of the most simple counties in
which to work--besides, many deed books and the administration accounts
for several years are missing. The records of Trinity Parish have been
preserved since its establishment in 1750, though they contain only meager
Smoot data. Furthermore, the complete destruction of all deeds in St. Mary's
County, and no administration accounts prior to 1806 made it most difficult
in straightening out the entanglements of the Smoots in that county. 

It is regretted that the numerous personal letters which were sent to the
representative descendants, now scattered throughout the States and the
Territory of Hawaii, remained unanswered, but I wish to acknowledge with
sincerity my appreciation of the few who responded and manifested interest
in my undertaking. Space does not allow the mentioning of all, but I do wish
to express my thanks to Mr. Harvey Clinton Smoot, of Prescott, Arizona, Miss
Annibel Stine, of Tuscumbia, Alabama, Dr. James Edward Smoot, of Concord,
North Carolina, and Mr. Archibald F. Bennett, secretary of the Genealogical
Society of Utah, to whom I am indebted for the descendants of Abraham Owen
Smoot, the Mormon leader. 

And I am also particularly grateful for the aid of Mrs. Mary Turpin Layton--a
granddaughter of Mary Adeline (Smoot) Turpin--a charter member of the Irving
Wells Chapter, D. A. R., of Quantico, Virginia, one of the organizers of the
Nanticoke Chapter, D. A. R., of Hurlock, Maryland, a member of the Daughters
of the Barons of Runnemede, and an outstanding authority on the old families
of the lower section of the Eastern Shore. 


viii


I furthermore wish to extend my gratitude for the many courtesies afforded me
by the staff of the North Carolina Historical Commission during my stay in
Raleigh. Their graciousness and old-world charm of manner contrasted most
favorably with my reception at the Archives Division of the Virginia State Library.
Owing to inhospitableness, lack of understanding, and the negative attitude of that
office, I was forced to curtail the work planned there, and was prevented perhaps
from the obtainment of many additional facts on the Virginia branches. 

Finally, no genealogist, amateur nor professional, is infallible and if I have
erred in any statement, I shall be glad to have it brought to my attention with
sufficient evidence to show that wrong conclusions have been drawn. 

And it is with pleasure that I present these findings to the descendants of the
distinctive family of Smoot, this first day of July, one thousand nine hundred
and thirty-six. 

                                 HARRY WRIGHT NEWMAN 
                                      The Presidential 
                                     Washington, D. C. 


ix

CONTENTS
                                                    PAGE
Introduction                                        XIII

William Smute                                          1

Richard Smoot2 and His Descendants                     7

Thomas Smoot, Gent.2                                  50

Captain Thomas Smoot, Gent.3                          54

Captain Barton Smoot4 and His Descendants             56

Thomas Smoot4 and His Descendants                     82

Charles Smoot4 and His Descendants                   106

William Smoot4 and His Descendants                   123

Edward Smoot3 and His Descendants                    129

William Smoot, Gent.3 and His Descendants            132

               George Smoot5                         141

               Cuthbert Smoot5                       149

               Caleb Smoot5                          151

               William Smoot5                        152

               Alexander Smoot5                      163

               Abraham Owen Smoot7                   172

Miscellaneous                                        185
Military and Naval Services                          196

xii


                    [llustration: Smout Coat of Arms]
                            Smout

xiii


                         INTRODUCTION

PRIOR to the thirteenth century there lived upon his feudal estates 
near the town of 'S Gravenhage in the Province of Zuid Holland a vassal
of the Count of Holland who, when family names were being adopted by
the civilized States of Western Europe, assumed the cognomen of "Smout".
Why this name became attached to him and his family is a matter of conjecture,
smout in the Netherland language signifies the inelegant but highly necessary
food product "lard" or more literally "grease". 

Time passed. The sons of this Dutch vassal gradually amassed wealth and as
their enterprises or estates offered an important source of revenue for the
Counts of Holland and Zeeland--for about this time the two counties had been
united under one head--they assumed a more prominent position in the realm.
Their sons in turn relinquished the industry of their immediate ancestor and
devoted themselves to public service and combat during which time one
distinguished himself sufficiently to be granted by the reigning Count of
Holland the privilege of using arms. At first the emblem was a plain black
crescent painted on the metal shield of the senior member of the household,
but gradually the emblem became more complex as the institution of heraldry
advanced. 

The crescent thus became the symbolic emblem of the House of Smout and thus
served as the basis for the later and more modified coat-of-arms in which the
background of the shield remained gold with three black crescents. 

Years passed. Some descendants of the Squire of 'S Gravenhage succeeded in life,
many fell in battle, others became enriched from industry and commerce which
were remarkably great in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries among the cities
of Holland and Flanders. Through their wealth and position the gentlemen of the
House of Smout intermarried with noble and gentry houses of the Province, and
thus attained greater importance and prestige among the subjects of the 
Netherland Kingdom. 

At the beginning of the fifteenth century one member of the House of Smout had 
allied himself in marriage with several gentry houses of his State and had 
established his seat at Rotterdam, also in the Province of Zuid Holland. 
About this time, for it was not until the fourteenth century that the practice 
of quartering arms became common among the nobility, this member of the Smout 
family was granted permission to bear the emblems of his maternal ancestry. 
Thus, we have the Smouts 


xiv


of Rotterdam, with the unicorn, shells, and bars, but still retaining the 
identity of the original symbols of his paternal line in the first quarter 
of his arms. 

From this point to the time that William Smout or Smute, the pioneer settler 
in America, was established at London in the seventeenth century, the history 
of his immediate forbears is somewhat hazy and confused. Inasmuch as we have 
not proved the parents of the American emigrant, one can only assume that he 
was one of the younger sons of a noble house and for that reason he became a 
constructor of watercrafts. But one can not dispute the facts that William 
Smute, of Pickawaxon, Maryland, had the name and all the tradition of the Dutch 
House of Smout. It has been handed down from pre-Revolutionary members of the 
family, that the Smoots of Maryland bore a coat-of-arms and that "there was a 
reindeer on it". (No doubt the unicorn). 

The Dutch origin of the family has been traditional in several branches of 
the family in America, but before passing one must not overlook the Scotch 
legend of the Smoot branch of Dorchester County, perhaps the most affluent 
and cultured branch of the Smoot family of the early post-Revolutionary era. 
It is believed, however, that this tradition became confused with the undisputed 
Scotch lineage of their Douglas ancestry which married with this branch in both 
Charles and Dorchester Counties and which can claim direct descent from Scotch 
nobility and connection with the Royal House of Stuart. Then it is possible that 
the emigrant, before sailing for Virginia, tarried for a while in the land 
beyond the Cheviot Hills and had married a Scotch lass. 

Like most early colonial families, the name was spelled in several different 
forms on the early records--the most common and earliest was "Smute", but 
other variations found were Smut, Smot, Smoote, Smouth, and finally Smoot, 
but some who migrated South used Smoote as late as the War between the States. 

A tradition which proves a myth, the origin of which is veiled in mystery, 
is that three Smoot brothers while serving in the British Army during the 
Revolutionary War deserted, joined the Continental forces, and remained in 
America. At the first Federal census of 1790, members of this family were 
found only in the Southern States of Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, 
all of whom are proved descendants of the Maryland pioneer. The name Smoot 
is therefore distinctly Maryland as Cabot is of Massachusetts and 
Spottiswood of Virginia. 

More than three hundred counties of the 1850 census were searched in the 
preparation of these chronicles, and it was a few days before the 


xv


submission of the manuscript to the printer that a Smoot was found to be 
born outside of the United States. It was John Smoot (spelled exactly like 
that of the Maryland family) a stevedore of Mobile, Alabama, who claimed 
Germany as his birthplace. This fact is rather significant as it adds another 
convincing threat to the Continental origin of the Maryland family. 

The only early family which could possibly be confused with the descendants
of William Smute is the German family of Smootz which settled in Pennsylvania.
Prior to the Revolution Abraham Smootz, a member of this family, was an early
settler in the Valley of Virginia. Later the s was substituted for the z, and
the city directories today show members of this family scattered throughout the
States. Yet, it is possible that some branches of this family have actually
dropped the s and thus spell their name like that of the pioneer family of
Maryland. 

The London and Edinburgh city directories today, both towns containing the
greatest assortment and representation of individual names in their respective
kingdoms, do not list a single resident by the name of Smoot. Perhaps, it is
safe to state that the family is practically unknown in Great Britain today. 


1


                         WILLIAM SMUTE

WHETHER William Smute was born in Scotland, on the Continent, or in England
is an unsolved question at the writing of these chronicles, but we do know that
his birth occurred about the year 1596/7. In his late teens he was apprenticed
to a boatwright who trained him in that craft until he obtained sufficient
perfection as to be acceptable to the guild of that industry. He selected
undoubtedly a livelihood which had been hereditary in his family, as was
customary in England and the Continent of his day, and the fact that he
aspired to be a designer and constructor of boats indicates perhaps early
days spent near the seacoast. Furthermore, the Netherlanders being among the
foremost seafaring peoples of his day, adds another thread to his Dutch origin. 

Sometime during the year 1633 William Smute was in London when he, as a member
of the Boatwright Guild, agreed to perform 50 days of work in Virginia for Colonel
Thomas Burbage. It was this contract no doubt which changed his destiny from being
a progenitor of a relatively provincial family in England to one which
subsequently attained in some branches wealth and position in America. 

Shortly after the year 1633 William Smute sailed from England and settled at 
Hampton, York (now Elizabeth City) County. The first mention of his name in public 
records is that of February 24, 1642, when he was granted for the transportation 
of eight persons into Virginia "400 acres of land in the Countie of Yorke near the 
head of Tymber Creek on the north side of Charles River near the land of Mr. Minifee" 
Research fails to disclose the identity of the persons whom he brought into the 
country, but it can be assumed that they were servants and his immediate family,
for circumstances are such that as early as 1633 he must have been the father of
several young children. 

He next appears on record as "William Smote of Hampton Boatright". There from
all circumstances he maintained an establishment befitting his rank and position
in the community, and pursued his trade as boatwright, constructing with the aid of
indentures many of the watercrafts used by the early settlers. In 1644 George Codd
completed his term of servitude under William Smute, so consequently the court
ordered the granting to Codd, in accordance with the rules of indentures fulfilling
their service, "3 barrels of corn and cloathes". 

William Smute fought in the campaign against the Pamunky and Chickahominy Indians,
and for his services he was granted 600 pounds 


2


of tobacco on October 1, 1644, by the Grand Jury held at James City.1 For his
participation in one of the early Indian Wars, all of his proved male descendants
who maintain the position today of "gentlemen" are eligible to membership in the
Society of Colonial Wars in America. 

Among his neighbors were Ashwell Batten, a name connected with the Smoot family by
marriage, George Menefy, Esq., and Lewis Burwell, Gent. The latter on June 12,
1648, received for the transportation of a number of inhabitants a grant of 
2,350 acres of land which extended in one direction "down the river along the 
land of George Menefy Esq. until it meets the land of William Smoote". 

William Smoot created a number of financial obligations and appeared frequently 
in court. In 1644 he acknowledged an indebtedness of 854 pounds of tobacco to 
Ashwell Batten and was ordered by the court to "make payment of the said 854 
pounds of tobacco with court charges to the said Ashwell Batten within five days".
On March 8, 1645, William Smoot petitioned the court to protect the property of 
Joseph Hill who was indebted to him (William Smoot) against the claims of Ashwell 
Batten for 850 pounds of tobacco. 

In 1644 William Smoot owed Francis Morgan 1,188 pounds of tobacco. At one time
he purchased from John Davis a mill and the land on which it stood. In 1646 
William Smoot sued William Broch for a debt of 600 pounds of tobacco. Shortly 
after this action, William Smoot with his family departed for the Province of 
Maryland. 

On November 22, 1646, Robert Bouth appeared at court and "ordered an attachement 
against the estate of William Smote for security of a debt of 900 1/2 bushels of 
meale being due to him by bill in regard the said Smote is gon out of the Colony 
to Maryland". 

It seems as if William Smoot assigned his land in Virginia or parts thereof to 
Edmond Peters, of Gloucester County, who was granted 442 acres on March 22, 1659, 
described as follows "at the head of Timber Necke Creek 342 acres beginning at 
Captain Perye's land adjoining 100 acres of his own land and running to William 
Alsopp's land, 100 acres beginning on a branch of the said creek extending near 
the land of Mr. Lewis Burwell, deceased, and 192 acres part of 400 acres granted 
to William Smoote 24 February 1642 and assigned to the said Peters and 250 acres 
for the transportation of five persons". 

It is reasonable to assume that his eldest children were born on the other side, 
but the fact that some of his progenies were minors when he settled in Maryland 
proves that at least some were born in Virginia. 1Henning's Statues, vol. 1, p. 
287. 


3


His wife at the time of his migration to the Province was Grace ----, whom he 
had married as a widow Wood, with a daughter. No record has been found of an 
earlier marriage, but it is noted that the given name of Grace is missing among
the descendants of his sons. 

Grace, the wife of James Atwickes and later that of Thomas Hinton, was
referred to by some of the children as "sister". She and her first
husband, however, were transported into Virginia by John Dorman, of
Northampton County, who demanded land in 1655. It is therefore a
question whether she was born Grace Wood or Grace Smoot. William Smoot,
however, did not transport her with his family in 1646, but she came
into Maryland at a later date through the activities of John Waghop who
transported her, her husband, and children--William and Jeane Atwickes. 

                        Children of William Smoot

    1. Richard Smoot married Elizabeth ----. q.v. 
    2. Thomas Smoot married Jane Batten. q.v. 
    3. Elizabeth Smoot married Humphrey Atwickes. 
    4. Anne Smoot, born 1640, married William Hungerford and William 
        Barton. Issue: William Hungerford. 
    5. Alice Smoot. 
    6. William Smoot married Jane ----. q.v. 

What actuated William Smoot to change his residence from Virginia to
Maryland will perhaps always remain a subject of conjecture, but we do
have 1646 as the year in which he forsook his allegiance as a subject of
Virginia to that of a tenant or subject of Lord Baltimore. On June 12,
1647, he was granted by His Lordship's Land Office a patent for 300
acres of land near the mouth of Herring Creek, known as "Smoote" in
consideration of his own migration into the Province and the
transportation of his wife and two children (unnamed) in the year 1646.
This tract lay on the Potomac River near the mouth of Herring Creek,
east of the land of Thomas Bushnell, in the Manor of New Towne in
present St. Mary's County. It is believed that on this land he first
established his seat but eventually moved westward and settled on his
surveys around the Wicomico. He later conveyed this land to John
Co----. 

Another entry shows that he was awarded a patent for 400 acres of land
originally known as "Smoothly" for the transportation of his wife Grace
and her daughter Elizabeth Wood, and his children Thomas, Richard,
Elizabeth, Anne, and Alice, and a maid servant Anne Woodnot at his own
expense from Virginia to Maryland on or about April 6, 1646. This patent
later became known as "Attwicke's Purchase" and lay on the west side of
the Wicomico. Another warrant was issued for 


4


land on the south side of Herring Creek between the lands of Robert
Kedger and Walter Roans. 

William Smoot and his son-in-law, William Hungerford, were among those
who on April 17, 1650, signed the Stone's Declaration as "We the said
Lieutenant, Council, Burgesses, and other Protestant inhabitants"
declared that they enjoyed "all fitting and convenient freedom and
liberty in the exercise of our religion under his Lordship's Government
and interest". Thus, there is evidence that William Smoot was a member
of the Established Church of England and was not in opposition to the
Roman Catholic faith of the Calverts. Until the Revolution his
descendants adhered strictly to the Anglican Church, one taking Holy
Orders and being rector of the parish at historic St. Mary's City. 

On January 26, 1652, William Smoot assigned a portion of "Atwicke's
Purchase", lying next to the lands of John Hatch, to Humphrey Atwickes
and another portion to Richard Smoot. The transactions were acknowledged
by Grace Smoot his wife. In 1658 William Smoot patented 240 acres of
land on the west side of the Wicomico River known as "Smootwood", a
portion of which he subsequently assigned to William Barton. This tract
became known as "The Hills", 190 acres being later held by Walter Hanson
and 50 acres by Notley Maddox. In 1665 he transported seven persons into
Maryland for which he was granted 350 acres of land, and later an
additional six persons for which he received 300 acres. The latter he
assigned to Richard Morris. 

William Smoot practised his profession in Maryland by designing and
constructing many of the early vessels used in the inter-colonial trade
between Maryland and Virginia. He built a pinnace for Ralph Beane, of
St. Mary's County, and another for Charles Calvert, Esq. In 1649 he sold
a boat to a Mr. Groffey, of Virginia. His interest was not only centered
in the construction of watercrafts but in trading as well. He at one
time purchased a boat from Governor Leonard Calvert and after using it
for a period, he sold it in the year 1647. He was in touch with people
and affairs in Virginia, and in 1651 certain business was transacted
between him and Captain Francis Morgan, of York County. 

His reputation as an authority on watercrafts was recognized to the
extent that he was called upon to appraise various vessels. On September
1, 1662, "William Smoote, Carpenter, aged 65 years" deposeth upon oath
that the "ship called St. George's as she now lyes sunk in the
Wiccommico River was worth 2,000 pounds of tobacco and no more". 

On January 21, 1652/3, Colonel Thomas Burbage instituted legal action
against William Smoot through the former's attorney Captain Thomas
Cornwallys, of St. Mary's City, for the alleged non-fulfillment 


5


of the contract made in England. "Satisfaction upon a bond of œ4
Sterling Entered into by the defendt about 20 years since in England . .
. for the payment of 50 days work in Virginia". William Smoot defended
himself, declaring to be 56 years of age and stating that he discharged
the contract according to conditions. The case was dismissed and William
Smoot was awarded 150 pounds of tobacco for his trouble and expense in
coming about 40 miles from his home to appear at court. At this time it
is believed he was domiciled on his estate bordering the Wicomico as the
distance from Herring Creek to St. Mary's City would appear to be
somewhat less. 

William Smoote was in sympathy with Josias Fendall and consequently was
involved in the legal proceedings following his prosecution. On April
17, 1661, at the Provincial Court he was arraigned with twelve others
for "mutinously, seditiously, and the instigation of the Devil ...
assembled at the house of Josias Fendall in Charles County in February
1660, and attempted by force to rescue Josias Fendall formerly the
Governor of the Province and William Hatch Secretary". The jury returned
a verdict of "not guilty". 

Grace Smoote, the wife of William, died on January 14, 1666. Inasmuch as
she was reported in the records as the "wife", William Smoote was
apparently living at that date. It is believed that he died intestate
shortly afterwards, by 1670 at the latest. No record has been found of
the appraisement of his estate nor the administration. 

                         WILLIAM SMOOT2
                            (16-- - 1716)

William Smoot, the believed son of William the emigrant, remained in
Virginia or he was born after his father settled in Maryland and
returned to Virginia in early manhood. By 1672, however, he was
domiciled in Farnham Parish of Old Rappahannock (now Essex) County,
Virginia. 

On December 2, 1672, he witnessed the sale of a cow sold by Edward
Wrilly to Mary Wright. The fact that he witnessed a deed in 1672 would
indicate that he had at least attained his eighteenth birthday,
consequently his birth occurred prior to the year 1654. 

On January 16, 1678, he was present at the transfer of 307 acres of land
from William Fauntleroy to John Inglow. On July 4, 1681, he appointed
Alexander Newman his attorney to acknowledge the purchase of land from
William Fauntleroy. 


6


On March 18, 1683/4, William Smoot and Jane his wife of "Parish of
Farnham, Rappahannock County" conveyed to Richard Ellet for 2,400 pounds
of tobacco 100 acres of land lying in Moratico, where Thomas Sampson was
then domiciled. The deed was witnessed by Thomas Sampson and Richard R.
Draper. About this time he settled in Durham Parish of Richmond County,
where the births of his three daughters are recorded. 

                    Children of William and Jane Smoot

    1. Mary Smoot, born Apr. 7, 1693, married Thomas, son of Thomas 
        and Dorothy Durham, of Durham Parish. 
    2. Elizabeth Smoot, born Mar. 16, 1698. 
    3. Anne Smoot, born Mar. 16, 1698. 

Elizabeth Grady, of Richmond County, Virginia, willed to Mary Smoot "the
daughter of William Smoot" her entire landed estate, but in the event
that Mary died without issues then to William Smoot and his heirs. The
latter received all personal property and was named as executor. The
will, dated March 4, 1693/4, was not proved until November 4, 1702, by
Thomas Durham and Richard Draper. 

In 1700 William Smoot "Sr.", of North Farnham Parish, Richmond County,
conveyed 60 acres of land for love and affection to Dorothy, the wife of
Thomas Durham. Jane Smoot, his wife, waived her dower rights. The
consideration for this deed of gift remains a conjecture. It is known,
however, that Dorothy Durham, the grantee, ultimately became the
mother-in-law of the grantor's daughter Mary who at that time was only
seven years of age. 

The will of William Smoot was dated February 24, 1715, and proved in
Richmond County on July 4, 1716, by John Durham, Abraham Dale, and Bryan
Muckleroy. He willed his granddaughter Margaret Durham certain
personalty then to his grandson Joseph Durham. To his son-in-law Thomas
Durham, he devised certain personalty including the "bed whereon I now
lie" and a number of pieces of pewter; and to his granddaughter Sarah
Durham other articles of personal property. His wife was devised the use
of all lands and the plantation during life, then to his son-in-law and
the testator's three grandchildren. 

Thomas Durham, the contingent heir after the death of the widow, died in
1735 before the division of the land, consequently on May 16, 1739, a
commission was appointed to petition the estate for the three
grandchildren--Joseph Durham, Margaret Durham who had married Dominic
Newgent, and Sarah Durham who had married William Hanks. 

7

                        RICHARD SMOOT2

                              AND

                        HIS DESCENDANTS

Richard Smoot, son of William, was born perhaps on the other side and
was brought to America by his parent at an early age. His father
transported him to Maryland in 1646 which would seem to indicate that he
were a minor at that time. 

The fact that a warrant on September 26, 1673, was issued to him for 200
acres of land, 100 acres of which was due for "time of service of
himself and wife Elizabeth performed in the Province" has become a
subject of much controversy. It is sometime thought that he left the
Province, perhaps to Virginia where he married, and was returned to
Maryland as an indenture by an enterpriser. This is highly possible, but
the more logical conclusion is that he, wishing to reach perfection in a
trade, apprenticed himself to a local artisan in the Province, an act
which usually took the legal procedure of an indenture. While serving
his period of apprenticeship, he married a redemptioner and consequently
he was entitled to her land at the completion of her services. The other
100 acres of land to which he was entitled in 1673, were from assignment
of Thomas Notley, due the latter for the transporting of John Reed and
Robert Collingswood. 

                   Children of Richard and Elizabeth Smoot

    1. Richard Smoot married Margaret ----. q.v. 
    2. Edward Smoot married Lydia Newman. q.v. 
    3. Elizabeth Smoot, born Dec. 15, 1666. 
    4. William Smoot, apparently died young. 
    5. Eleanor Smoot married Humphrey, son of Humphrey and Margarey 
        (Cage) Warren. 

Richard Smoot established his seat on the tract known as "The Hills" in
Pickawaxon Hundred, where he eventually became the proprietor of one of
the largest landed estates in the hundred. About 1650 he received from
his father 200 acres of land adjoining the estate of Francis Pope on the
Wicomico River, which he later conveyed to his neighbor Giles
Thompkinson. In 1656 he assigned a portion of "Attwickes' Purchase" on
the Wicomico, which had been patented by his father, to Thomas Mitchell
who later conveyed to Humphrey Attwickes. The latter in 1662 sold to
Thomas Peircy, at which time the transfer was acknowledged by his wife
Elizabeth Attwickes. This tract in 1676 became the

8


subject of a suit in chancery, with Bridget Legatt, widow of John
Legatt, as the defendant. In 1667 Richard Smoot patented "Free Booty" of
50 acres lying on the west side of the Wicomico near the land of Thomas
Smoot. In 1674 he received a warrant for "Smoot's Purchase" of 100 acres
in St. Mary's County. 

At the lawsuit emanating from the estate of Captain William Batten in
1671/2, Richard Smoot served on the jury. 

The will of Richard Smoot was dated April 23, 1676, and admitted to
probate in Charles County on October 31, 1676, by Henry Henley and
William Browne, with "brothers William Barton and Robert Rowland" as the
overseers. He bequeathed to his eldest son, Richard, the dwelling
plantation at the age of 21 years, and Edward an 100-acre portion of
"Smoot's Purchase" at majority. The residue of his estate was to be
divided among his five named children--Richard, Edward, Elizabeth,
William, and Eleanor. 

At the court held in Charles County during January 1676/77, Elizabeth
Smoot "by the consent of Captain William Barton one of the overseers of
the estate of Richard Smoot late of Charles County deceased" was placed
under the guardianship of Elizabeth wife of Henry Bonner "till she
arrives at the age of 16 years or marriage and said Elizabeth Bonner to
learn the orphan to read and write and not to work without the house".
At the same court Edward Smoot chose Thomas Taylor, and Richard Smoot
that of Walter Davis. 

On January 20, 1677, Walter Davis of Charles County, the greatest
creditor of Richard Smoot, appeared in court and declared that the
overseers "would not to further intermeddle with goods". Furthermore, he
stated that Richard Smoot, the eldest son, was then of age sufficient to
select his own guardian and that he had chosen him. The judge ordered
that the goods and chattels of Richard Smoot be transferred to Walter
Davis. 

The inventory of the personal estate of Richard Smoot Sr. was appraised
by John Cage and George Creducle on May 15, 1677, with William Barton
Jr., as the executor. 

The following letter of the same date to Walter Davis was signed by
Philip Calvert: "I understand that William Barton Jr. hath intermeddled
with goods of Richard Smoot and not fit to administer. He brought an
inventory which I ordered to be recorded ... The orphans are under your
care now and I desire you to look after them". 

On July 18, 1677, Captain Humphrey Warren in court exhibited the bond of
Walter Davis, the administrator of Richard Smoot Sr., deceased, with
John Hater and Robert Inglesby as the sureties. 


9


                         RICHARD SMOOT3
                            (1663 - 1734)

Richard Smoot, son of Richard and Elizabeth Smoot, was born about 1663
in Pickawaxon Hundred, Charles County, Maryland. By the will of his
father in 1677, he was bequeathed, as the eldest son, the dwelling
plantation "The Hills", but somehow this tract of 240 acres subsequently
became the property and seat of Captain Humphrey Warren II. In 1711
Richard Smoot with James Walker was bondsman for his sister Eleanor
Warren, the administratrix of Humphrey Warren III. 

It is assumed that he was the Richard Smoot who settled in Prince
Georges County, where he died intestate in 1734. Letters of
administration were issued to his widow, Margaret Smoot, with John
Harris and Leonard Marbury as her bondsmen. It is believed that he
married late in life and that no children were born to the union. 

                         EDWARD SMOOT3
                            (16-- - 1707)

Edward Smoot, son of Richard and Elizabeth Smoot, was born probably at
"The Hills" in Pickawaxon Hundred, Charles County. In November 1681, he
with a number of others received from His Lordship's Treasury 110 pounds
of tobacco for "acts of public service", which is believed for his
participation in one of the early Indian campaigns. 

He married Lydia, daughter of George and Lydia (Ashcomb) Newman, but
then the widow of John Gee, late of St. Mary's County. Records show that
on February 25, 1684, the administration of the estate of John Gee was
granted to Edward Smoot who "marryed the widow of the said deceased". 

                Children of Edward and Lydia (Newman) Smoot

    1. John Smoot married Posthuma Ford. q.v. 
    2. Lydia Smoot married ---- Bean. Her estate was administered 
        1721 by John Smoot. William Howard and William Deerego 
        were sureties. 
    3. Edward Smoot, born June 20, 1693. q.v. 
    4. Elizabeth Smoot, born June 20, 1693. 
    5. Eleanor Smoot. 

On April 5, 1689, Edward Smoot purchased from his kinsman William Smoot
a portion of "Wicomico Fields", lying on the west side of the Wicomico
River, where he established his seat which for over a century remained
the traditional home of his descendants. 

10


Edward Smoot died intestate. Letters of administration were issued on
July 15, 1707, to Gerard O'Cane who had married the widow. His personal
estate was appraised on August 16, 1707, by William Maddox and Richard
Morris. John Loftus was surety for the administrator. 

At a subsequent rent roll, 200 acres of "Wicomico Fields" were possessed
by Gerard O'Cane and his wife Lydia, 100 acres by John Warren, and 200
acres by Colonel Contee. 

By her third husband, Lydia Gee-Newman-O'Cane had at least two
children--Gerard II and Judith. Gerard O'Cane Sr. died intestate in
1713, when his step-son John Smoot was appointed administrator by the
court. John Wilder and Edward Ford offered bond. Within a short time his
widow died, thereupon her son John Smoot was named administrator. In
this instance John Wilder and William Derregoe were his bondsmen. 

An administration account shows that John Smoot while administrating on
the estate of Gerard O'Cane accounted for the money due from the
deceased (Gerard O'Cane) as the administrator of Edward Smoot as well as
disbursements to Eleanor Smoot daughter of Edward deceased, to Judith
O'Cane daughter of the deceased, and to James O'Cane "his son". From the
peculiar wording of the account, one would conclude that James was a son
by a previous marriage, yet no statement proves this fact. 

John Smoot in 1720 when he rendered an account on the estate of his
mother made the following statement ... "whereof he could render a
specific inventory and that he believes if any such there were that they
by mistake were appraised among the estate of Gerard O'Cane, her
deceased husband, who died but a small space before her". 

At this time Gerard O'Cane, the minor orphan, had been removed from the
guardianship of his half-brother and placed under his fullblood sister
Judith Dutton. The latter by that date had married Matthew Dutton, of
Charles County. Matthew Dutton died in 1734, naming in his will his
widow Judith, and sons Notley, Thomas, and Gerard, and an unborn child.
His widow on February 27, 1734, leased "Popleton" lying in Charles
County to Leonard Smoot. She by 1737 had married secondly John Penn. 

                          JOHN SMOOT4 (1686 - 1728)

John Smoot, son of Edward and Lydia (Newman) Smoot, was born November 2,
1686, in Pickawaxon Hundred, Charles County. He married Posthuma, born
July 29, 1693, the daughter of Edward and Elizabeth (Allanson) Ford, of
Chingoemuxon. On August 7, 1721, 


11


John Smoot and Posthuma his wife conveyed to John Sanders for 7,500
pounds of tobacco a portion of "Christian Temple Manor" which had been
willed Posthuma by her father and whereon Richard Coombs lately dwelt.
The manor "Christian Temple" had been surveyed in 1659 for Thomas
Allanson. A complete list of the children of John Smoot and Posthuma his
wife has not been proved.

                 Children of John and Posthuma (Ford) Smoot

    1. Edward Smoot married twice. q.v. 
    2. John Smoot married twice. q.v. 
    3. Eleanor Smoot. 
    4. Posthuma Smoot, spinster. Estate administered by Edward Smoot 
        1772. 

In 1717 John Smoot was bondsman for Frances Lofton when she
administrated on the estate of her husband John Lofton. He also was
bondman for William Derregoe when he administrated on the estate of John
Derregoe in 1719, for Matthew Wardeen in 1722 when he administrated on
Robert Cull's estate, and he with Matthew Dutton was bondsman for
Katherine Edwards when she administrated for Thomas Wakefield. 

John Smoot maintained his seat at "Wicomico Fields" where he died
intestate during November 1727/8. The inventory of his personal estate
was taken in April 1728, with James Smith and Lydia Smoot signing as the
kinsmen. Mark Penn and Alexander Hanna were the greatest creditors. At
this date the widow had married John Groves who, as administrator,
certified to the inventory, stating that his wife, Posthuma Groves,
relict and administratrix of John Smoot' deceased, was "not capable of
riding at Present". Mark Penn and William Hawton were the bondsmen for
the administrators. At a subsequent rent roll of Charles County, John
Groves held a portion of "Wicomico Fields" for the orphans of John
Smoot. 

Posthuma Smoot-Groves outlived her second husband and rendered an
account on his estate in April 1750. She showed a disbursement to John
Smoot "being a part of his father's estate". The Groves representatives
besides the widow were William Groves, aged 17 years, and Mary Groves,
aged 16 years.1 

William Groves Jr. made a noncupative will during 1757 in the presence
of Edward Smoot and Abel Wakefield, willing his sister Mary 1She married
first George Thomas by whom she had Tyre, John, Mary, and Philip, and
secondly Philip Jenkins by whom she had Posthuma Eleanor. 


12


Groves his entire estate except a negro which was to be sold for the
benefit of his mother. Posthuma, the widow of John Smoot and John
Groves, died in Charles County during 1771. 

                         EDWARD SMOOT4
                            (1693 - 17--)

Edward Smoot, son of Edward and Lydia (Newman) Smoot, was born June 20,
1693, in William and Mary Parish, Charles County, Maryland. He migrated
to Northumberland County, Virginia, and settled in St. Stephen's Parish,
where the births of his children are recorded. The name of his wife is
not given. No further record of Edward Smoot has been found. 

                       Children of Edward Smoot

    1. Winifred Smoot, born July 18, 1724. 
    2. Anne Smoot, born Oct. 13, 1726. 
    3. Thomas Smoot, born July 9, 1729. q.v. 
    4. Sarah Anne Smoot, born June 4, 1732. 

                      EDWARD SMOOT, GENT.5
                            (1724 - 1795)

Edward Smoot, son of John and Posthuma (Ford) Smoot, was born at
"Wicomico Fields", Charles County, Maryland. On February 22, 1762, in
defining the boundary of his plantation he gave his age as 38 years,
therefore, placing his birth about the year 1724. He married first Miss
Chandler, according to a notation made in the Bible of his grandson.
Furthermore, a son of this marriage noted in his family Bible that he
was the child of Edward and Anne Smoot. From these references, we
consequently learn that his first wife was Anne Chandler. The Smoots and
the Chandlers were neighbors and friends and therefore it was natural
that a marriage between the two families would materialize. 

John Chandler was domiciled in Port Tobacco Hundred early in the
seventeen hundreds, though he married Anne Penn, sister to Mark Penn,
whose ancestral home was in Pickawaxon Hundred. The will of John
Chandler, proved in 1735, named his sons, John, William, Stephen, and
daughters, Sarah Hamill, Anne Chandler, and Mary Chandler. John and
Stephen settled on the Wicomico. Subsequently Stephen Chandler sued
Edward Smoot for possession of land in St. Mary's County. Although the
lawsuit failed to show the cause for legal action, it is concluded that
in some manner Edward Smoot through his wife was holding land previously
belonging to the Chandlers. 


13


                Children of Edward and Anne (Chandler) Smoot

    1. John Smoot married Elizabeth Douglas. q.v. 
    2. Edward Smoot married Rosannah Hodson. q.v. 
    3. Lydia Smoot married Clement Kennedy. 
    4. William Groves Smoot. q.v. 
    5. Henry Smoot married Elizabeth Warren. q.v. 
    6. Mary Smoot married Nov. 16, 1790, Jessie Tull. 

In 1758 John Chandler was bondsman for Edward Smoot when he administered
the estate of John Carver, likewise, Stephen Chandler was his bondsman
in 1777 when he administered the estate of Boles Tyre Balthrope. John
Hamill, son of John and Sarah (Chandler) Hamill, by his will of February
21, 1760, named his godson William Groves Smoot and his (testator)
uncles John Chandler and Stephen Chandler. 

By 1767 Edward Smoot had become a widower and had taken as his second
wife Mary Magdaline, daughter of Benjamin and Sabina (Donaldson)
Stoddert, of St. Mary's County. 

                 Children of Edward and Mary (Stoddert) Smoot

    7. Alexander Stoddert Smoot. q.v. 
    8. Jannet Smoot married Thomas Douglas. 
    9. Benjamin Stoddert Smoot. q.v. 

Edward Smoot added to his estate from time to time both by patent and by
purchase. In 1755 he received a warrant, which was issued under the name
of "Wilder's Mistake", for an unclaimed tract of land amounting to 66
1/2 acres between his plantation and that of John Wilder. In 1764 he
patented "Sukey" of 22 acres, and in 1765 "Smoot's Trifle" of 3 3/4
acres. 

In 1764 Edward Smoot purchased from William Mitchell, of Prince William
County, Virginia, 153 acres of land lying in that county, the tract
being a portion of 300 acres bought by Luke Cannon from Thomas Young,
conveyed to Young by George Pemberton and conveyed to him by Charles
Sneed to whom the land had descended by inheritance. 

On March 16, 1767, Edward Smoot, Merchant, and Mary Magdaline his wife
deeded to James Tippen, of Frederick County, Innholder, 76 acres of
land, being one-third of the dwelling-plantation of Benjamin Stoddert
called "Friendship" originally granted to Colonel Thomas Addison and
James Stoddert, and inherited by Edward and Mary Magdaline Smoot. 


14


In 1770 Edward Smoot purchased from Philip Ludwell Lee 1,300 acres of
"Rehoboth", portion of an original tract of 2,300 acres lying on the
eastern side of the northwest fork of the Nanticoke River in Dorchester
County. The original patent was in the name of John Lee, of Virginia,
but later passed to his brother Richard Lee. 

The tax list of 1783 recorded him as a resident of William and Mary
Parish, stating that his seat "Wicomico Fields" had a "beautiful
location on the Wicomico River". His other taxable realty in that year
were "Wilder's Mistake", "Bullen" on the Potomac of 25 acres, "Bole's
Purchase" of 483 acres on the Potomac, and 50 acres of "Harrison's
Adventure". 

Edward Smoot was a communicant of the Parish Church, still standing at
Wayside, and shared a pew with Anne Smoot, according to the assignment
of 1752. Although his wife at this period was Anne, it was not
accustomed in that day to assign pews in the name of a wife.
Consequently, she was probably a maiden sister or a near kinswoman. 

Edward Smoot took the Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity to the State of
Maryland during 1778. Record exists, however, of his having been
summoned by a commission of Charles County on the suspicion of
maintaining a correspondence with the enemy. The charge was dismissed
December 23, 1777, after he had given bond for his appearance at the
next county court. 

On June 14, 1785, he deeded to his son Edward Smoot for love and natural
affections a portion of "Rehoboth", lying at the mouth of Batchelor
Creek. Mary Magdaline Smoot, his wife, waived her dower. At one time he
was a magistrate of Charles County. 

The will of Edward Smoot was dated October 2, 1794, and proved in
Charles County on February 24, 1795, by J. Harris, Sarah Marshall, and
Henley Adams, with the widow and son Alexander Stoddert Smoot as the
executors. 

He confirmed the gifts, both real and personal, made to his deceased son
Edward and his heirs. To his son William Groves Smoot, he devised
personalty and confirmed the gifts already given him. To his grandson
Thomas, son of William Groves Smoot, he bequeathed several tracts of
land on which the latter was domiciled, with William Groves the
privilege of residing upon the land during life. 

Henry was willed a portion of "Rehoboth" lying in Dorchester County. To
the heirs of his son John, he devised one guinea and confirmed the gifts
already bequeathed. 


15


Alexander received after the death of his mother all land purchased from
Levy Chum, Philip Key, and Edward Gardner, being a portion of "Wicomico
Fields", providing he paid Philip Key œ75, the agreed price. Alexander
also received 375 acres of "Indian Landing", lying on the southwest side
of the northwest fork of the Nanticoke River, in Dorchester County. 

Benjamin Stoddert Smoot was bequeathed the dwelling-plantation, being a
portion of "Wicomico Fields", and two tracts purchased from Joseph
Scrogen known as "Harrison's Adventure" and "Scrogen's Grove", a tract
adjoining called "Wilder's Mistake", and the water mill. 

Daughters, Lydia Kennedy and Jannet Smoot, received certain articles and
one-half of the personal estate, the other half to be enjoyed by his
widow during life, then to his two sons--Alexander and Benjamin. His
granddaughters, Mary Smoot of Henry and Catherine Kennedy, were each
devised a negro. In the event that his daughter Mary was living at the
time of his death, she was to have œ5 and the confirmation of gifts
already bequeathed. 

His executors were to sell "Lucky" and the proceeds were to be divided
between his two grandchildren--Elizabeth Smoot of William and Elizabeth
Kennedy of Clement--when they came of age. His wife, whom he named as
executrix with his son Alexander, died before the probation of the will,
inasmuch as on February 24, 1795, the court records refer to "Alexander
S. Smoot as the surviving executor". The inventory of the personal
effects was taken on June 14, 1796, with Benjamin S. Smoot and William
G. Smoot as the next of kin. 

Court records show that Alexander Stoddert Smoot was made the guardian
of his brother and sister--Janet and Benjamin Stoddert. Citation was
issued at the court of 1797-1799 to Alexander Smoot, executor of Edward
Smoot, to show why he had failed to render a final account on the
estate. 

                          JOHN SMOOT5
                            (1726 - 1795)

John Smoot, son of John and Posthuma (Ford) Smoot, was born about 1726
in William and Mary Parish, Charles County. He married twice. The
identity of his first wife remains in doubt, but his second wife was
Anne, daughter of Charles Allison Ford, to whom he was married on April
8, 1779, by the Rev. John McPherson of William and Mary Parish. Her
father died in Charles County during 1784 and named his son-in-law John
Smoot, daughter Anne Smoot, and grandchildren Samuel and Mary Smoot. 


16


                         Children of John Smoot

    1. Mary Anne Smoot married May 27, 1779, John Brown Wilder. 
    2. Horatio Smoot married thrice. q.v. 
    3. Elizabeth Smoot. 
    4. John Smoot married Elizabeth Grant. q.v. 
    5. Charles Smoot. q.v. 
    6. David Smoot. 
    7. Eleanor Smoot married Apr. 6, 1782, Paul Minitree. 
    8. Samuel Smoot. 
    9. Mary Smoot, died young. 

Being a younger son, John Smoot failed to share in the realty holdings
of his deceased father. In 1750, presumably shortly after he obtained
majority, he was devised his share of the personal estate by his mother.
He established his seat in Trinity Parish where the marriages of his two
daughters are recorded in the register. In 1766 he patented "Rogue's
Harbor" of 3 1/4 acres and two years later he received a warrant for
"Good Luck" to be surveyed into 44 acres. At the first census he was
presumably the John Smoot Sr. who was the head of a family with 2 males
over 16 years of age, 4 males under 16 years, 4 females, and 11 slaves. 

He died intestate in Charles County. The court named his widow Anne
Smoot, the administratrix, while Neale H. Shaw and John E. Ford offered
bond. The inventory of his personal estate was taken on September 24,
1795, and appraised at œ336/14/6. Horatio Smoot and John B. Wilder
signed as next of kin. The proceeds were distributed in 1806 among the
widow, the seven surviving children, and Eleanor Minitree
(granddaughter) daughter of Eleanor Minitree, deceased. 

In 1800 his widow Anne Smoot was the head of a family in William and
Mary Parish, Charles County, with two males between the ages of 16 and
26, one female between the same ages, herself over 45, and 20 slaves.
She was not the head of a family at the next census. 

                         THOMAS SMOOT5
                            (1729 - 1757)

Thomas Smoot, son of Edward, was born July 9, 1729, in St. Stephen's
Parish, Northumberland County, Virginia. He married Sarah, the daughter
of Anne Alexander. The latter in her will proved in Northumberland
County during 1757 devised her plantation to her son Ewell Alexander
during life then to her grandson Thomas Smoot and his male heirs, and
for want of heirs to her daughters Winifred Walker, Anne White, Sarah
Smoot, and Mary Townsend. To her

17


daughter Sarah Smoot, she willed the "chest that was formerly her
grandmother". Personalty was also left to her grandsons Thomas and
Charles Smoot. 

                Children of Thomas and Sarah (Alexander) Smoot

    1. Thomas Smoot, d.s.p. 
    2. Charles Smoot, born 1753, married Elizabeth ----. q.v. 

Thomas Smoot died intestate. An inventory of his personal effects was
taken on May 9, 1757. His widow died intestate; the inventory of her
estate was made as of April 13, 1761. 

                       CAPTAIN JOHN SMOOT6
                            (1748 - 1793)

John Smoot, son of Edward and Anne (Chandler) Smoot, was born about 1748
at "Wicomico
Fields", William and Mary Parish, Charles County, Maryland. He married
first Elizabeth, born 1749,
the daughter of Captain Joseph Douglas and Catherine Musgroves his wife. 

                 Children of John and Elizabeth (Douglas) Smoot

    1. Catherine Smoot married 1788 John Sydreham Cropper, M.D. 
        Issues: Zadoc and Elizabeth who married Henry P. Waggaman. 
    2. Henry Smoot, died young. 
    3. Amelia Lee Smoot, died May, 1790. 
    4. John T. Smoot married Elizabeth Douglas. q.v. 

John Smoot settled about 1771 upon "Rehoboth" where he constructed
Liberty Hall a spacious Georgian mansion, now one of the show places of
Dorchester County. At the census of 1790, he had 41 negroes on his
plantation, being the largest slave owner in the county. 

On May 20, 1778, John Smoot was commissioned a captain of the Third
Company of the Upper Battalion of Dorchester County Militia. He was in
service as late as April 1, 1780. His mercantile business maintained a
fleet of its own ships, some of which were captured by Tories during the
war. He was also a county magistrate and represented his district at the
first State Assembly of Maryland.1 

His wife died on July 19, 1787, and was buried in the private burying
ground at Liberty Hall. On April 10, 1790, he married Elizabeth Parker. 

1Archives, vol. 21, p. 97; vol. 43. p. 126; vol. 45, p. 28; vol. 48, p.
46. 


18


                 Children of John and Elizabeth (Parker) Smoot

    5. Joseph Edward Smoot. q.v. 
    6. John Henry Smoot married Keziah Keene. q.v. 

John Smoot purchased from Eccleston Brown on July 12, 1793, "Sandy Hill"
on the upper side of the Northwest Fork Bridge (now Federalsburg,
Caroline County), running from the bridge south, then up the street
binding on far corner of "John Smoot's Store House". The title, however,
did not pass until April 13, 1796, when it was delivered to J. Douglas,
the administrator of his estate. 

John Smoot before his death controlled a number of mercantile
establishments on the Eastern Shore--besides the store at Northwest Fork
Bridge, he had one at Crotchers' Ferry. In his concern at Vienna he had
Alexander Douglas as his partner, and then there was a lumber firm of
Douglas & Smoot, near his seat of "Rehoboth", where also stood a mill. 

John Smoot negotiated his will on August 27, 1787, shortly after the
death of his first wife. He bequeathed the dwelling-plantation of 440
acres to his son John, also his merchandise interests. Other realty was
devised to his two children Catherine and Henry. He died on January 15,
1793, and was buried in the private burying ground at Liberty Hall. 

In the meantime he had remarried and become the father of two additional
children, all of whom he failed to provide for either by a codicil or a
new will. In 1799 his widow married Thomas Jackson at Christ Church,
Cambridge, and with him instituted action in the courts for an equaled
distribution of the estate. 

Furthermore, another law suit developed over a portion of "Rehoboth"
about 1806, particularly that portion owned by Launcelot Lee who died
intestate about 17--, leaving his sister Amelia Lee his heir-at-law. The
latter afterwards married John Anderton, of Dorchester County, who
predeceased his wife. Amelia (Lee) Anderton by her will devised the
portion of "Rehoboth" to her namesake Amelia Lee Smoot who died
intestate, thereupon the land descended to her brother John Smoot and
her sister Catherine Cropper, wife of John Cropper. The suit showed that
Catherine had died during 1804, leaving Zadoc and Elizabeth Cropper as
her only heirs-at-law. 

The date of the erection and the builder of Liberty Hall, "Rehoboth", or
the Old Turpin Place, as the villagers of Dorchester County refer to it,
have been the subject of much controversy. Some of the chambers of
commerce on the Shore, tourist bureaus, and writers of Maryland claim
that it was constructed as early as 1742 by the Lees, others cite 1757.
Mary Turpin Layton was told by her great aunt that Liberty Hall was 


19


built by her great-great grandfather John T. Smoot, but writers and
promoters of the show places of the Eastern Shore refused to accept this
belief. It is she whom the compiler of these chronicles is indebted for
the following proof. 

The tax list of 1783, original on file at the Maryland Historical
Society, shows that John T. Smoot was seated on 908 acres of "Rehoboth"
with 1 frame dwelling house, 1 kitchen, 1 granery, 1 saw mill, 1 store
house, 14 log slave houses, all located on the Nanticoke. He was further
seized of "Robson's Ridge" of 50 acres, with 1 frame dwelling house and
3 log houses, all situated inland; "Hill's Adventure" of 50 acres with 1
frame dwelling and 1 log house, also inland; and "Conclusion" of 360
acres with 1 log house, also inland. His total landed estate in
Dorchester County consisted of 1,687 acres, and he was the master of 42
slaves. 

Edward Smoot was seized of 523 acres of "Rehoboth", and 3 acres of
"Fisher's Lott", both tracts being inland, with 1 dwelling house and 12
log slave quarters. The only other owner of a portion of "Rehoboth" was
John Anderton, the husband of Amelia Lee, who was seized of 400 acres
with 2 small log houses on the Nanticoke, but his seat was at "Sandy
Hill". His landed estate, as has been previously stated, ultimately
reverted to the two children of John T. Smoot by his first wife. 

When John T. Smoot negotiated his will in 1787, he bequeathed the brick
dwelling on his plantation to his son John, therefore, it is an
undisputed fact that "Liberty Hall" was erected by him sometime between
the years 1783 and 1787. 

                         EDWARD SMOOT6
                            (1748 - 178-)

Edward Smoot, son of Edward, was born 1748 at "Wicomico Fields", Charles
County, Maryland. His wife was Rosannah, the daughter of Thomas Hodson.
The following son has been proved, that there were other children is
probable.(*) 

               Children of Edward and Rosannah (Hodson) Smoot

    1. Samuel Smoot married twice. q.v. 

During the Revolutionary War, Edward Smoot was justice of the peace in
Dorchester County. In 1785 he received a portion of "Rehoboth" from his
father, upon which he was already seated. He died prior to 1790 and was
buried at "Rehoboth". 


(*)Chloe Smoot who married Daniel Caulk, according to license in
Dorchester 
County, could probably be a daughter. 


20


According to the first census, his widow Rosannah Smoot was the head of
a family in Dorchester County with one male over 16 years of age, two
males under 16, two females, and six slaves. On January 24, 1791, she
married John Laine, according to license issued in Dorchester County. 

On July 12, 1793, John Lane assigned to John Smoot "Discovery" on the
road from Crotchers' Ferry to New Market, at which time Rosanna his wife
released her dower. 

                     WILLIAM GROVES SMOOT6
                            (1755 - 1800)

William Groves Smoot, son of Edward, was born about 1755 at "Wicomico
Fields", Charles County. He was the godson of John Hamill Jr. who
referred to him in his will in 1760. The wife of William Groves Smoot
has not been established nor the names of all his children. The census
schedules would indicate that he had at least seven sons and four
daughters. Two children have been proved, while a third is inferred. 

                     Children of William Groves Smoot

    1. Thomas Smoot married Elizabeth Flagg, widow. 
    2. Elizabeth Smoot. 
    3. Heathy Smoot married Horatio Smoot. q.v. 

From the meager facts we have on the personal life of William Groves
Smoot, it is concluded that he was indulgent and for that reason his
father failed to will him a share of the landed estate, but left it in
fee to his grandson, Thomas. At the March session of the court in 1778,
William Groves Smoot was arraigned and accused of bartering provisions
for rum and sugar on board of the enemy's ship. It is the opinion that
his action was due more for the thirst of alcohol, as no gold was
exchanged, rather than for any sympathy with the British. 

He was bondsman for John Tompkins Jr., when he closed the estate of Mary
Brandt. 

William Groves Smoot died intestate as well as insolvent sometime
shortly after 1800. In the latter year Stephen Lynch, one of the
creditors, compelled the court to issue citations against Thomas Smoot,
late of Virginia, the son of William Groves Smoot, to ascertain why he
failed to request letters of administration for the settlement of his
father's estate. The administration was subsequently granted to Stephen
Lynch who acquired all assets. 


21


Thomas Smoot, his son, married Elizabeth Flagg, widow, the marriage bond
being negotiated in Norfolk County, Virginia, on January 27, 1798, with
William Dalby as his surety. 

On September 3, 1798, as a resident of Portsmouth, Virginia, he conveyed
to Henry Henley, of Charles County, Maryland, the land willed him by his
"grandfather Edward Smoot late of Charles County deceased", where his
father William G. Smoot was then living, known by the name of "Hatton's
Improvement", "Hatton's Land", and "Smith's Gore". 

Thomas Smoot died intestate shortly after his father. Stephen Lynch, the
creditor and administrator, of his father's estate was issued letters of
administration, with Theophilus Tabbs and John Cole, as the bondsmen.
Accounts were rendered in 1803 and 1806, showing no distribution nor
clues to his legal heirs. 

                    LIEUTENANT HENRY SMOOT6
                            (1759 - 1820)

Henry Smoot, son of Edward, was born October 26, 1759, in William and
Mary Parish, Charles County. At the beginning of the Revolutionary War,
he served as a private in Captain Yates' Company of Charles County
Militia. After his settlement in Dorchester County, he was commissioned
a lieutenant of the Upper Battalion of that county.1 

On December 23, 1781, by the Rev. William McPherson, of William and Mary
Parish, he was married to Elizabeth, the daughter of John and Anne
Warren. Her father died in Charles County during 1773, at which time he
named his daughter Elizabeth. 

                Children of Henry and Elizabeth (Warren) Smoot

    1. Mary Smoot married Nov. 14, 1805, David (Daniel) Kennedy. 
        Issue: Lydia Anne. 
    2. Robert Smoot, born 1795, died 1797. 
    3. Alexander Smoot married twice--Mary Smith on Feb. 27, 1822, 
        and Sarah, dau. of Cyrus Bell, on Mar. 7, 1825. 
    4. Joseph Smoot married twice. q.v. 
    5. Thomas Smoot married twice. q.v. 
    6. Janette Smoot, born Dec. 6, 1801, d.s.p., married Daniel
Robertson 
        and William L. Drury. 
    7. Elizabeth Smoot, born Aug. 17, 1803, d.s.p. Aug. 17, 1834,
married 
        Basil Brawner. 
    8. Edward Smoot married Ariminta Frazier. q.v. 
    9. John W. Smoot married Ardella Smith. q.v. 


1Unpub. Md. Records, D. A. R. Library, vol. 2, p. 295. 


22


In 1783 Henry Smoot was seized of 12 acres of "Gore", 72 acres of
"Hatch", and 70 acres of "Hatton's Improvement", all lying in Charles
County. 

His father deeded him 500 acres of "Rehoboth" in Dorchester County,
where he established his domicile. He was drowned on February 13, 1820,
while crossing the frozen Nanticoke River at Crotchers Ferry. Some say
that it was in the attempt to rescue some horses which had wandered upon
the ice, others claim it occurred while he was trying to win a bet. 

On March 31, 1821, Thomas Smoot and Alexander Smoot were commissioned to
divide the land of their deceased father. The estate was partitioned
into eight parts and distributed to the following--Thomas Smoot;
Alexander Smoot; David Kennedy in right of his wife Mary; Elizabeth,
Mary, and Joseph heirs of Edward Smoot, deceased; Daniel Robertson
(Robinson) in right of his wife Janette; John Smoot; Joseph Smoot; and
Elizabeth Smoot. 

His widow returned to Charles County, where her will was proved on
January 12, 1824. She bequeathed her daughter Elizabeth Brawner
personalty and wished to confirm the bill of sale to her husband Basil
Brawner. She devised her sons Joseph and Thomas, and daughter Jane
Robinson certain personal property in Dorchester County. 

Thomas Smoot, her son, on October 25, 1826, petitioned the court of
Dorchester County for a division of the estate, showing that the widow
of Henry Smoot at her decease left a dower in realty. The heirs were
Mary Kennedy the wife of Daniel, John Warren Smoot, Alexander Smoot who
conveyed his rights to Thomas Smoot, Joseph Smoot who assigned to Daniel
Caulk, Elizabeth wife of Basil Brawner, and Jennet the wife of Daniel
Robinson. 

On March 30, 1831, Thomas H. R. Fowke and Lydia Anne his wife of Charles
County, Maryland, deeded to Thomas Smoot, of Dorchester County,
Maryland, for $85.50 their rights and title to one-fifth of the land
called "Rehoboth" containing 80 acres which the said Thomas H. R. Fowke
and Lydia Anne his wife inherited by the death of Mary Kennedy, the
mother of Lydia Anne and wife of Daniel Kennedy, deceased. The tract
being the portion of Mary Kennedy in the estate of Henry Smoot, her
deceased father. The conveyance was witnessed by Joseph Smoot and John
Dunnington in Charles County. 

                   ALEXANDER STODDERT SMOOT6
                            (17-- - 1815)

Alexander Stoddert Smoot, eldest son of Edward and Mary Magdaline
(Stoddert) Smoot, was born
at "Wicomico Fields", William and 


23


Mary Parish, Charles County. On September 8, 1800, he conveyed to
Stephen Lynch, of St. Mary's County, land that had been willed him by
his father. In 1802 he sold additional realty to James Doyle, of Charles
County. At no time did his wife waive her dower rights. 

Facts tend to indicate, however, that he married twice, his first
marriage occurring in Charles County shortly after 1790, but a thorough
search of the records has failed to disclose any conclusive proof of a
first union. The census of 1790 establishes him as a bachelor but at the
next census of 1800 he had in his household a female born between the
years 1755 and 1774, the period in which he was born, and also three
males less than ten years of age. These small boys could not possibly be
orphaned nephews, and therefore it leaves much to be assumed. 

There was an Alexander Smoot who was drafted from Maryland for service
in the War of 1812 and who was discharged during 1814 in Anne Arundel
County, Maryland, "60 miles from Home". This Alexander Smoot has not
been placed among the other Smoots, and it is believed that Alexander
Stoddert Smoot at this period was beyond the age for compulsory military
service, yet a man born between 1790 and 1800 would be of age for
combat. 

If the fact of an early marriage is in doubt, it is known, however, that
Alexander Stoddert Smoot married Elizabeth, the daughter of Le Roy
Hipkins, of Caroline County, Virginia, and his wife Sally Reynolds, of
Essex County, Virginia. 

                    Children of Alexander Stoddert Smoot

    1. Alexander Smoot, d.s.p. 
    2. Archibald Smoot married twice. q.v. 
    3. Mary Magdaline Smoot married William Easton. Issues: Sara 
        and Mary. 
    4. Eliza Virginia Smoot married ---- Montgomery and ---- 
        Wismal. 
    5. Sara Ellen Smoot, born Oct. 14, 1811, in D. C., died Nov. 11,
1870, 
        married Moses Waring, born Mar. 17, 1808, Ridgefield, Conn., 
        died Dec. 1, 1884, Mobile, Ala. Issues: Alexander; Bartlett, 
        born 1838; Cora, born 1841, married Dr. Alfred Powell; Marion, 
        born, 1843; Mary, born 1845; Joseph W., born 1848; and Belle, 
        born 1850. 

As early as 1806 Alexander Stoddart Smoot established his home in the
Federal Capital, where he maintained a mercantile house. He sustained
financial reverses, and from time to time he was forced to dispose of
his numerous slaves and other personal property to meet his obligations.
The last time his name appears on the deed records of the 


24


District of Columbia was July 6, 1814, when he sold a number of slaves
to Ezekiel McDaniel. 

A letter addressed to him by P. A. L. Contee, dated September 27, 1813,
at Pickawaxon, Maryland, authorized him to sell a negress and her child,
and at the same time Mr. Contee presented his compliments to Mrs. Smoot
and "as you pass to Richmond I hope you will be mind full of your
promise to call and pass some time with us at the Glebe". 

Alexander Stoddert Smoot died during 1815, apparently in Washington,
inasmuch as his interment was in old Holmead Cemetery of that city. His
widow remained in the national capital for some time after his death, as
is evident from the following certification recorded among the deeds of
the District. "I hereby certify that my mother Sarah Hipkins of Port
Royal, Virginia, has removed from that place to the County of
Washington, D. C., a negro girl about 15 years of age and has placed the
girl in my possession". Signed Elizabeth Smoot, dated May 1, 1821. 

Her daughters, however, settled in Mobile, Alabama, where they became
leaders of the social life of that city. The census of 1860 shows that
the husband of Mrs. Moses Waring owned realty assessed at $200,000 and
personalty at $30,000. 

A letter of Mrs. Sallie Hipkins, dated Port Royal, April 21, 1830, to
her granddaughter, Mrs. Mary Easton, of Washington, D. C., now in the
possession of a descendant, mentioned a letter from Ellen (Mrs. Waring)
which tells of a "fine son" born to Eliza (Mrs. Montgomery-Wismal) on
February 23, and begs Mrs. Easton to write to Archy. 

                COLONEL BENJAMIN STODDERT SMOOT6
                            (1781 - 1844)

Benjamin Stoddert Smoot, son of Edward and Mary Magdaline (Stoddert)
Smoot, was born 1781 at "Wicomico Fields", in William and Mary Parish.
Being a minor at the death of his father, he was placed under the
guardianship of his brother Alexander. 

A valuation of his real estate in 1789 gives an excellent description of
the ancestral dwelling on "Wicomico Fields" and reflects the simple
grandeur of this branch of the family. The dwelling house of brick
(which is understood to be standing today) was 32 feet by 28 feet, the
kitchen 20 by 12, the smoker 12 by 10, the tobacco house 40 by 20, the
store house 28 by 12, the granery 17 by 12, the brick dairy 10 feet
square, the stable (which was noted as new) measured 16 by 12, and the
cow barn 60 by 16. 

At the attainment of his majority, Benjamin Stoddert Smoot found his
estate insolvent, therefore, he abandoned his patrimony and on 


25


horseback sought his fortune in the Territory of Alabama. He located
ultimately at St. Stephens, now in Washington County, where he conducted
a tavern for a number of years. 

In 1808 he married Harriet, born 1792, the daughter of Samuel Mims who
lost his life at the massacre of Fort Mims on August 13, 1813. 

             Children of Benjamin Stoddert and Harriet (Mims) Smoot

    1. Adeline Smoot, born Oct. 31, 1809, died Sept., 1896, at Mobile, 
        Ala., married Major Elijah Montgomery, of Lexington, Ky., 
        and second in 1834 A. S. Woodstock. Issues second marriage 
        only; Benjamin Smoot; Mary Margaret; Helen; Frances Belt; 
        and others. 
    2. Edward Smoot married twice, disappeared in 1854. 
    3. Margaret Smoot married Sebastian S. Jennings, C. S. A., died at 
        Battle of Perryville, Ky., had two sons killed in Civil War. 
    4. Susan Smoot, born 1824, died 1861, at New Orleans, married Aug. 
        14, 1840, Lieut. Wm. B. McLean (died 1848), served in Mexican 
        War; she married secondly William E. Dubose, of Baldwin 
        Co., Ala., license Dec. 18, 1848, at Bay Minette; and thirdly
Trenton 
        Gibson. Issues: (first) Edgar Oscar; and (second) William. 
    5. William Smoot, C. S. A., died Richmond 1861. 

The first wife of Benjamin Stoddert Smoot died during 1826. On February
10, 1831, in Washington, D. C. he secured license to marry Anne McGuire. 

             Children of Benjamin Stoddert and Anne (McGuire) Smoot
                 6. Benjamin Smoot married Octavia ----. q.v.

On September 4, 1813, Benjamin Stoddert Smoot was commissioned a captain
of a mounted militia company in Washington County, Alabama, and served
from that date until October 13, same year. He was again in service from
November 2, 1813 to January 2, 1814, as major of a Mississippi Militia
Battalion, and from April 18, 1814 to October 17, same year, he was at
Fort Claiborne under the command of Lieutenant Colonel George H. Nixon,
of the Mississippi outfit. 

During the subsequent war with the Creek Indians he served on the staff
of Andrew Jackson with the rank of colonel. He later settled in Mobile
where he was at one time paymaster. He died there during 1844. 

                         HORATIO SMOOT6

Horatio Smoot, son of John and Anne Smoot, was born between the years
1775-1794, according to census records, yet he proved the will of
Townley Maddox in 1787. It is possible that he married thrice. A son
gave his birth year as 1796, which would therefore establish a marriage 


26


prior to July 7, 1799, when he was wedded to his kinswoman Heathy Smoot
by the Rev. John C. Brockenborough, one time rector of William and Mary
Parish. The parents of Heathy have not been proved, but she is thought
to be a daughter of William Groves Smoot, a kinsman and neighbor of
Horatio Smoot. 

Horatio Smoot married also Bethialand ---- who was probably the
daughter of Stephen and Anne Chandler. Bethialand (Bethelhelin) Chandler
shared in the estate of her father on February 1, 1801. In his will
Horatio Smoot referred to his "last wife". 

                        Children of Horatio Smoot

    1. Sylvester W. Smoot married Mary ----. q.v. 
    2. ---- Smoot married Sylvester W. Goodrick. 
    3. ---- Smoot married John Herbert. 
    4. ---- Smoot married Arthur Latimer. 
    5. ---- Smoot married Peregrine Nevit. 
    6. John W. Smoot married Mary Elizabeth Posey. q.v. 
    7. Mary Smoot, born Aug. 18, 1811. 
    8. Horatio Smoot, born Jan. 6, 1813. 
    9. Thomas Smoot, born June 3, 1821. 

Horatio Smoot in 1805 was bondsman for Thomas Latimer when he
administered on the estate of Elizabeth Anne Latimer. 

On May 22, 1815, Horatio Smoot conveyed "James' Purchase" lying in
William and Mary Parish, Charles County, to the heirs of the late
Colonel Thomas Harris, of Charles County. The heirs so-named were Thomas
Harris, Elizabeth Harris, Joseph Harris, John Francis Harris, Kitty
Vincent, wife of William Vincent, Gwynn Harris, Violetta Harris, Nathan
Harris, and Morgan Harris. 

Horatio Smoot dated his will December 14, 1822, it being proved in
Charles County on February 22, 1823, by Arthur Latimer, Elhannah Swann,
and Thomas Scriver. he directed that his sons by his "last wife" should
have a common English education and then bound out for some profitable
trade. He also mentioned single daughters. 

On July 15, 1826, Sylvester W. Smoot, Sylvester W. Goodrick, John
Herbert, Arthur Latimer, and Peregrine Nevit, the latter four in right
of their wives, acknowledged receipt of their share of the estate of
Horatio Smoot to Bethialand Smoot, his executrix. 

The year before Bethialand Smoot had been appointed by the court
guardian of the four minor children, at which time Sylvester W. Smoot
and Sylvester W. Goodrick offered bond. 

In 1832 John W. Smoot was the administrator of the estate of
Behetherland Smoot.

27

JOHN SMOOT6
                            (1755 - 1845)

John Smoot, son of John Smoot by his first wife, was born May 11, 1755,
in Charles County, Maryland, though his son in 1880 stated Virginia as
the birthplace. Before majority he had left the parental roof and had
settled in the western portions of Culpeper County, Virginia. 

In 1775 he enlisted in a company commanded by Captain Daniel Morgan who
was soon promoted to the rank of colonel, consequently Lieutenant John
Humphrey was raised to the captaincy. The company rendezvoused at
Winchester, and from that point marched to Cambridge, Massachusetts,
where it joined the forces of Benedict Arnold, under whom the outfits
made their way to Quebec, Canada. John Smoot, however, was taken ill
enroute and was sent to Cambridge with other incapacitated soldiers to
recuperate. After he regained his health, he marched to Roxbury,
Massachusetts, where he joined the company of Captain Hugh Stevenson. He
remained there until the Americans captured Boston, after which he with
his company marched to Staten Island. He was honorably discharged at the
conclusion of the year's enlistment. 

In Culpeper County, Virginia, during 1779, he enlisted in the company of
Captain Benjamin Roberts, with James Slaughter as the lieutenant.
Colonel George Slaughter and Colonel Clark commanded the regiment. His
outfit marched from Culpeper to the falls of the Ohio River, now
Louisville, arriving during October of 1779, and remaining until the
fall of 1780. At this time he hired a man to complete the remainder of
his term of six months, consequently he returned to Culpeper County. 

In July 1781 he again volunteered and served under Captain Cadawalder
Slaughter, of Culpeper County, and was present at York Town during the
surrender of Cornwallis. 

At the cessation of hostilities, John Smoot returned to Culpeper County,
where he married, according to tradition, Elizabeth Grant, a native of
Virginia. A complete list of their children has not been determined. 

                 Children of John and Elizabeth (Grant) Smoot

    1. Armistead Smoot married Anne Riley. q.v. 
    2. John Smoot married Elizabeth Dale. q.v. 
    3. Humphrey Smoot married Sarah Meeks. 
    4. Elijah Smoot married Elizabeth Jones. q.v. 
    5. Elizabeth Smoot married Aug. 14, 1811, William Dale. 
    6. Winyann Smoot married Jan. 24, 1803, Ludwith Meeks. 


28


    7. Anny Smoot married Mar. 19, 1808, Lewis Brown. 
    8. Susannah Smoot, born 1795, married Isaac, son of Dixon and 
        Elizabeth (Norman) Brown, of Culpeper Co., Va. License Jan. 
        7, 1813, Hardin Co., Ky.; moved to Pike Co., Ill. Issues: Maria; 
        Mahala; Squire, born 1816; Owen; Hardin; John; Norman W., 
        born Sept. 23, 1840; Willis, born Sept. 2, 1827; James, born
Apr. 
        22, 1833; Susan; Benjamin; and Jane. 

Prior to 1795 John Smoot migrated to Hardin County, Kentucky, and
established his seat on Round Stone Creek. In 1805 he was a taxpayer on
325 acres of land. The first available census for Kentucky (1810)
indicated that he had a large family. 

On September 20, 1832, at Elizabethtown, Kentucky, he applied for a
revolutionary pension. His services were certified by John Cole, of
Barron County, Kentucky, who served with him under Captain Morgan, and
by George M. Bedinger, of Carlisle County, Kentucky, who stated that he
had in his possession a receipt book containing about 80 signatures of
soldiers belonging to the company of Captain Stevenson. He furthermore
certified that he had not seen Smoot for 56 years, but the following
appeared in his book. 

     "Roxbury Camp, January 1, 1776. 

     Received of Capt. Hugh Stevenson six pounds 12 shillings lawful 
     money in full three months pay as a soldier in the Continental
Service 
     and Blanket Money. 
                      John X Smoot." 

His wife, according to family papers, died in 1830. He died May 23,
1845, and was buried in the family burying grounds near Millerstown,
Kentucky. His son Elijah was appointed the administrator of the estate. 

                         CHARLES SMOOT6

Charles Smoot, son of John and Anne (Ford) Smoot, was born between the
years 1784 and 1794, in Charles County, Maryland. After 1800 he migrated
to Chesterfield District of South Carolina, where by the census of 1810
he was the head of a family with a young wife and daughter less than 10
years of age. Very little information has been obtained on his
descendants, but the sketches of the following South Carolinians are
believed to be his descendants. 

Chandler Smoot, born 1810 in the Chesterfield District, enlisted in 1831
at Charleston in Company F, of the Second United States Regiment of
Artillery. 


29


During the Civil War Allison Smoot enlisted at Darlington, South
Carolina, in a company commanded by Captain Wood of the Fourth South
Carolina Regiment. 

Calvin Smoot enlisted at Charleston in Company I of the 18th South
Carolina Regiment of Infantry commanded by Colonel Gadberry. In December
1863, he was confined to the hospital at Florence. At the Seige of
Petersburg on July 30, 1864, he was taken prisoner by the enemy and
carried North. He arrived at Point Lookout, Maryland, on August 5, 1864,
from whence he was transferred to Elmira, New York, on July 11, 1865.
His papers stated that his home was in Georgetown, Georgia (believed to
be South Carolina), and that his complexion was florid, hair dark, eyes
blue, and height 5 feet 9 inches. He was released by the Federal
Government during the latter part of 1865. 

                         CHARLES SMOOT6
                            (1753 - 178-)

Charles Smoot, son of Thomas and Sarah (Alexander) Smoot, was born
September 5, 1753, in St. Stephen's Parish, Northumberland County,
Virginia. He married Elizabeth ----, who was probably a Widow Way at
time of marriage. 

                   Children of Charles and Elizabeth Smoot

    1. Thomas Smoot, born Jan. 12, 1779, d.s.p. 
    2. William Smoot. 
    3. Charles Smoot. 
    4. Elizabeth Smoot. 
    5. Winifred Smoot. 

In 1774 Charles Smoot was indebted to Rawleigh Alexander to the extent
of œ200. In 1783 one finds him the guardian of Davenport Way and John
Way, the orphans of Richard Way. Charles Smoot inherited the 100-acre
plantation of his maternal grandmother, Anne Alexander, upon the death
of his brother Thomas, when it was recorded in court that all the
daughters were deceased except Winifred Walker and that the "said"
Charles Smoot was the heir-at-law. 

According to the State Enumerations for 1782 Charles Smoot was the head
of a family in St. Stephen's Parish with six whites and one negro slave.
Two years later the records show that he still had six whites in his
household and that the improved property on his plantation consisted of
one dwelling and four out buildings. 

The estate of Charles Smoot was divided in St. Stephen's Parish,
Northumberland County, on April 19, 1788, when the widow received 


30


œ22/10/7, Winney Smoot œ11/5/4, and Davenport Way who was the guardian
of the minor
children--William, Charles, and Elizabeth--received œ11/5/4 for each of
his wards. 

His son William Smoot on June 9, 1801, sold the 100-acre plantation of
his deceased father to Edward Mitchell, of Fairfax County, Virginia. The
land was described as bordering the Wicomico River and adjoining the
lands of Rich Edwards, Lancelot Edwards, and Joseph Hudnalls. It is
assumed that William Smoot conveyed his holdings prior to his leaving
the county, inasmuch as the first available census for Virginia (1810)
shows no Smoots as heads of families in Northumberland County. 

                          JOHN T. SMOOT7
                            (1779 - 1832)

John T. Smoot, son of John and Elizabeth (Douglas) Smoot, was born
October 17, 1779, at "Rehoboth", Dorchester County, Maryland. On October
17, 1799, he married his first cousin Elizabeth, daughter of Captain
Joseph Douglas of Caroline County, and Rebecca Lee Nichols his wife. 

                 Children of John and Elizabeth (Douglas) Smoot

    1. Arrietta Smoot, born 1802, died Jan. 1, 1865, married April 15, 
        1822, Charles Turpin Smith, born Sept. 4, 1794, died Apr. 18, 
        1857, son of Matthew and Priscilla (Turpin) Smith. Issues: 
        Olivia; Benjamin Conaway; George; John Henry; Joseph Van 
        Buren; Priscilla; Mary Julia; and Arrietta Caroline. 
    2. Josiah Smoot, born May 1, 1807, died Sept. 6, 1840, married
Margaret, 
        dau. of Philip and Mary (Anderson) Feddeman. Issues: 
        Henry and Philip. 
    3. Nancy Smoot, spinster.  , 
    4. Eliza Anne Smoot, born 1812, died Nov. 12, 1866, married 1830 
        Henry, son of Philip and Mary (Anderson) Feddeman. Issue: 
        Mary. 
    5. Mary Adeline Smoot, born Aug. 30, 1817, died Mar. 24, 1851, 
        married June 7, 1832, Francis B. C. Turpin, son of Major 
        Francis Turpin and his wife Nancy, one-time widow of Capt. 
        Ezekiel Reed, and dau. of Lieut. Matthew Smith. Issues: John 
        Baynard; Elizabeth Anne; Mary Jane; William Henry; Gulia 
        Elma; Francis Thomas; Walter; and George. 

John T. Smoot served as member of the State Legislature in 1805. During
the War of 1812 he was paymaster of the 11th Maryland Regiment and was
ordered into service during April 1813. He resided at "Liberty Hall"
until 1812, when financial circumstances forced the sale 


31


of the parental estate to Francis B. C. Turpin whose son later married
his daughter. John T. Smoot died in Dorchester County on February 13,
1832. 

                      CAPTAIN JOSEPH SMOOT7
                            (1792 - 1857)

Joseph Edward Smoot, son of John and Elizabeth (Parker) Smoot, was born
1792 in Dorchester County. From Maryland he was appointed a midshipman
in the United States Navy on December 1, 1809, and rose successively to
the rank of captain. 

As midshipman he served on the U. S. S. Hornet with Captain James
Lawrence and participated in the engagement with the H. B. M. S. Peacock
and her capture on February 14, 1813. Other vessels on which he saw sea
service were Nonsuch, Macedonian, Peacock, Grampus, Erie, and Levant,
and had duty at the following Navy Yards--Norfolk, Washington, and
Portsmouth. His last command was at the latter station from 1852 to
October 1, 1855, from thence he retired to his residence on K Street in
the National Capital. 

He was one of the three Marylanders who received by an act of the
Maryland Legislature a sword at the conclusion of the War of 1812 "for
the gallant and good conduct of Joseph Smoot a native of this State and
now a lieutenant in the Navy of the United States in the actions between
the Hornet and Peacock and Hornet and Penguin". 

Resolution number one of the Acts of 1858 relates that the late Captain
Smoot felt himself aggrieved by the action of the Government of the
United States under the act entitled "an act to promote the efficiency
of the Navy" and that while suffering under what he conceived to be the
wrong and injustice done to him, he departed his life in sorrow and
sadness, and Mrs. Anne E. Smoot, his widow, feeling on her part that it
would not be proper to retain the sword, returned it to the State of
Maryland. 

The Governor of Maryland presented the sword which had thus been
returned to the State to Algernon Sydney Smoot, son of the late Captain
Joseph Smoot, with the charge that he shall cherish it as a testimonial
of high appreciation of the State of Maryland for the distinguished
service of his late father and that it shall never be drawn from its
scabbard for use except in defence of his country, her rights, or her
sacred honor. 

Joseph Smoot married first Margaret ----, born 1813. She died January
15, 1838, and was interred in Congressional Cemetery, Washington, D. C. 


32


The only child, Virginia, was born 1826 and died 1851. On March 14,
1844, according to license issued in Montgomery County, Maryland, he
married Anne, daughter of William and Elizabeth (Gassaway) Darne. 

                  Children of Joseph and Anne (Darne) Smoot

    1. William Algernon Sydney Smoot married Mary Head. q.v. 

Captain Joseph Smoot died on March 13, 1857, and was interred in
Congressional Cemetery, Washington. His will, dated September 25, 1851,
was probated in the District of Columbia on April 10, 1857. He
bequeathed his entire estate to his widow for the support of his "only
child Sydney". His widow survived until the year 1887. 

                       JOHN HENRY SMOOT7
                            (1794 - 18--)

John Henry Smoot, posthumous son of John and Elizabeth (Parker) Smoot,
was born February 1794, in Dorchester County, Maryland. During the War
of 1812 he served as a private in Captain Levin Rauleigh's Detachment,
an extra battalion of Dorchester County, which was ordered into service
during April 1813. On December 29, 1817, he secured license in
Dorchester County to marry Keziah Keene. On March 4, 1816, he sold his
interest in "Rehoboth" to Ezekiel Wheatley for $3,500. The 1820 census
for Dorchester County showed that he was the head of the family, with
two women, one between the ages of 26 and 45, and the other between 16
and 26, one male youth between 10 and 16 years, and a boy under ten. 

                         SAMUEL SMOOT7
                            (1770 - 1854)

Samuel Smoot, son of Edward and Rosannah (Hodson) Smoot, was born July
31, 1770, in Dorchester County, Maryland. On September 24, 1795, his
grandfather, Thomas Hodson Sr., of Dorchester County, deeded him for the
consideration of natural love and affection, describing him as a son of
the late Edward Smoot, a negro called Tom aged 11 years. On December 12,
1793, he purchased from David Harper, of Kent County, Delaware, 3 acres
of land on the southwest side of the northwest fork of the Nanticoke
River. 

Samuel Smoot married first Elizabeth, born February 13, 1781, the
daughter of Captain Ezekiel Reed and his wife Nancy Smith. License was
issued in Dorchester County on April 7, 1801. 


33


                 Children of Samuel and Elizabeth (Reed) Smoot

    1. Anna Maria, died young. 
    2. Avery Smoot married Emily Hunter Terrett. q.v. 

His first wife died on December 26, 1807. He married on May 5, 1808, his
cousin Elizabeth, daughter of Clement Kennedy and his wife Lydia Smoot.
Clement Kennedy in his will proved in Charles County on January 8, 1811,
named his daughter Elizabeth Smoot. 

               Children of Samuel and Elizabeth (Kennedy) Smoot

    3. Amanda Smoot, born June 25, 1809. 
    4. Clement Smoot, born Sept. 20, 1811. 
    5. Lydia Kennedy Smoot, born Aug. 4, 1815, died 1884, married Sept. 
        28, 1837, John Henry Waggaman, born 1807, died 1888, son of 
        Thomas Ennalls and Martha (Tyler) Waggaman. Issues: 
        Thomas Ennalls, born 1839; Elizabeth, born and died 1842; 
        Samuel, born Oct. 23, 1843; Henry Pierpont, born Jan. 21, 1845; 
        Mary Tyler, born Dec. 10, 1850; John Floyd, born 1852; Emile; 
        and George, born and died 1864. 
    6. Samuel Clement Smoot married Emma Smallwood. q.v. 
    7. Charles Henry Smoot, born Apr. 14, 1820, d.s.p. 1840, married 
        Mary Bosher. 
    8. John Smoot, born Feb. 20, 1823. 
    9. Luther Rice Smoot married twice. q.v. 
   10. Rosa Smoot, born Sept. 10, 1827, married Joseph B. Pleasants. 
        License D. C., July 2, 1845. 
   11. Arminta Smoot, born Apr. 23, 1831, married William H. Pleasants. 
        License D. C., Nov. 2, 1852. 

During the War of 1812, Samuel Smoot served in the First District of
Columbia Regiment of Field Artillery commanded by Major George Peter, of
Georgetown. 

About this time or shortly before, Samuel Smoot had moved to the Federal
District and settled in the city of Washington. His first acquisition of
realty in the District was on October 12, 1814, when he purchased from
John Murdock, of Georgetown, land in Georgetown "south of Causeway
Street" bordering the Potomac River, which had formerly been owned by
William H. Dorsey. He began the manufacture of bricks which became the
foundation for the affluence of this branch of the Smoot family. 

On April 26, 1816, he bought of George Peter land in Washington City
described as "lot numbered 7 in square numbered 1". Agnes Peter, wife of
George, waived her dower rights. The first published directory for
Washington, that is 1822, lists Samuel Smoot as residing on the "north
side of K Street north near Georgetown lower bridge". The 


34


1850 directory shows "Smoot's lime kiln, west side 27 between K and L
north". He died on July 8, 1854, and was interred in Congressional
Cemetery, Washington. 

                          JOSEPH SMOOT7
                            (1797 - 1846)

Joseph Smoot, son of Henry and Elizabeth (Warren) Smoot, was born
November 1, 1797, in Dorchester County, Maryland. At the beginning of
the War of 1812 he was sent to the United States Military Academy at
West Point, but resigned at the conclusion of the war and settled at the
National Capital where he became a prominent manufacturer and merchant.
He married his cousin Mary Anne, born June 18, 1805, daughter of Clement
Kennedy Jr. (born April 23, 1784) and his wife Pamelia (born 1787). 

Of seven children born to this union, only one daughter--Mary Jane
Smoot--born 1830, survived beyond the infant stage. She married her
cousin John D. Dement and become the mother of a son, Ralph, who died
without issues. 

The birth of her seventh child resulted in the death of the mother and
Pamelia Smoot died on February 26, 1840. On April 6, 1841, Joseph Smoot
married another cousin Julia Anne, born 1819, the daughter of William
and Julia (Kennedy) Dement, also a granddaughter of Clement Kennedy. 

                 Children of Joseph and Julia (Dement) Smoot

    8. Joseph K. Smoot, born 1842, d.s.p. in Calif. 
    9. William H. Smoot married Lavania O'Brien. q.v. 

Joseph Smoot maintained his residence at 2627 K Street in Washington,
built by Robert Peter, where George Washington was once entertained and
which became the first British Legation in the United States. Joseph
Smoot died April 30, 1846. 

During the Civil War residence in Washington was not safe for
Confederate sympathizers, consequently Mrs. Smoot leased her residence
and retired to her mother's plantation in Prince Georges County,
Maryland. The leasee sub-let to the Federal Government which housed from
time to time in the 21-room mansion thousands of ex-slaves. And true to
the race they destroyed entirely the hand-carved wood work, the
frescoing, and other interior features for which the house was noted.
Mrs. Smoot lived to celebrate her eightieth birthday and departed on
July 8, 1901. 


35


                         THOMAS SMOOT7
                            (1799 - 1853)

Thomas Smoot, son of Henry and Elizabeth (Warren) Smoot, was born
November 15, 1799, according to the records of Christ Church, Cambridge,
Maryland. On September 29, 1819, he married Rebecca, born February 5,
1801, the daughter of Amos and Mary Nichols Robertson, of Caroline
County, Maryland. 

               Children of Thomas and Rebecca (Robertson) Smoot

    1. Henrietta Smoot, born 1820, died 1830. 
    2. Thomas Henry Smoot married Lovica Ann Hackett. q.v. 
    3. William Robertson Smoot married Elizabeth Cannon. q.v. 
    4. Mary Elizabeth Smoot, born 1827, died 1835. 

His first wife died on March 9, 1832; he married secondly Mary Frances,
born 1812 in South Carolina, the daughter of George A. Z. Smith, then a
resident of Vienna, Dorchester County. The license was obtained in the
latter place on November 24, 1841. 

               Children of Thomas and Mary Frances (Smith) Smoot

    5. Anne Elizabeth Smoot, born 1842, spinster. 
    6. Rebecca Janet Smoot, born 1843, died 1908, married 1859, Joseph 
        Bramble. Issues: George Otis; Cora E.; Frank; Archer Smoot; 
        Edward; Mary King; Elizabeth; and Frances Rebecca. 
    7. Mary Frances Smoot, born 1846. 
    8. George Henry Smoot, born 1848, died 1862. 
    9. Sarah Araminta Florence Smoot, born Apr. 20, 1850, died Apr. 10, 
        1932, married Mar. 14, 1872, William Robert Hearne, died Mar. 
        13, 1921. Issues: William Edward, born July 21, 1874; Mary 
        Frances, born Jan. 1, 1876; Lucy, born Feb. 11, 1878; Ava 
        Judson, born Jan. 5, 1887; and Daniel Archer, born Dec. 4, 1880. 
   10. Edith E. Smoot, born June 19, 1853, died Feb. 22, 1907, married 
        Charles Middleton, born May 19, 1847, died Oct. 6, 1928, resided 
        in Virginia. Issues: Charles Bell, born June 4, 1871; William, 
        born Jan. 1, 1874; George F., born June 13, 1876. 

Thomas Smoot resided near Crotchers Ferry, Dorchester County, until
1849, when he moved to St. Mary's County. He died there on November 24,
1853, and was buried at Leonardtown. 

His will was dated October 5, 1852, and proved in St. Mary's County on
December 5, 1853. He bequeathed his son Thomas $5.00 and his son William
$10.00. The residue of his estate was left to his wife Frances during
widowhood, then it was to be partitioned among the children 


36


"which shall be left by me with her at the time of my death" that is,
Anne Elizabeth, Rebecca J., Mary Frances, George Henry, Sarah A. F., and
Edith E. 

His widow returned to Vienna, Dorchester County, where most of the
children married. 

                         EDWARD SMOOT7

Edward Smoot, son of Henry and Elizabeth (Warren) Smoot, was born in
Dorchester County, Maryland. On February 25, 1804, he married Ariminta
Frazier. He died leaving a young family--Elizabeth; Mary; and Joseph
(died Dec. 23, 1831). His widow on January 6, 1814, married Samuel Le
Compte. 

                       JOHN WARREN SMOOT7
                            (1786 - 1832)

John Warren Smoot, son of Henry and Elizabeth (Warren) Smoot, was born
May 10, 1786, in Dorchester County. During the War of 1812, he served as
a private in Captain William S. Harper's Company, of the 11th Maryland
Regiment. On January 8, 1817, he married Ardella, the daughter of
Matthew and Priscilla (Turpin) Smith; he died Feburary 14, 1832. 

                  Children of John and Ardella (Smith) Smoot

    1. Charles Thomas Smoot, born June 5, 1818, died Sept. 19, 1863, 
        married Margaret Bell, died May 9, 1883. License Oct. 24, 1842, 
        Dor. Co. 

                        ARCHIBALD SMOOT7
                            (1803 - 18--)

Archibald Smoot, son of Alexander Stoddert Smoot, was born about the
year 1803 in Maryland. He settled in Mobile County, Alabama, where
during December 1830, he married Aurelia, the daughter of John Taylor,
of Clarke County, Alabama. Six children were born, but only one matured
and married. The following children were at home at the 1850 census. 

                Children of Archibald and Aurelia (Taylor) Smoot

    1. Anna Mary Smoot, born 1833, married 1853 Henry Hall. 
    2. Ellen W. Smoot, born 1838. 
    3. Aurelia Smoot, born 1841. 


37


His first wife died young, and he married secondly Sarah A. Kimball,
born 1824, in Clarke County, Alabama. After 1850 he moved to Jackson in
Clarke County, where in 1860 he and his second wife were the only
members of his immediate household. He was listed as a miller, with
realty appraised at $500 and personalty at $10,000. 

               CAPTAIN BENJAMIN HUGH SMOOT, C. S. A.7
                            (1835 - 1899)

Benjamin Hugh Smoot, son of Benjamin Stoddert and Anne (McGuire) Smoot,
was born 1835 in Alabama. He married Octavia ----, born 1833 in
Alabama. At the census of 1860, he was employed in the United States
Post Office at Mobile and had realty appraised at $3,000 and a
personalty estate of $3,000. In his household besides an infant son,
Benjamin T., were his widowed mother, aged 48 and born in Maryland;
Catherine A. Tilghman aged 8; Fanny Tilghman aged 5, and Lola Hollinger
aged 18. He served as a captain in the Confederate Army during the Civil
War, and died in 1899 at Selma, Alabama. 

                       SYLVESTER W. SMOOT7
                            (1796 - 18--)

Sylvester W. Smoot, son of Horatio, was born 1796 in Charles County, and
married Mary ----, born 1797. The following children were at home
according to the 1850 census--Mary, born 1822; Lucy, born 1830; and
Margaret, born 1838. According to the next census, his post office
address was Newport, where he was domiciled with his two maiden
daughters, Lucy and Margaret. 

                         JOHN W. SMOOT7
                            (1809 - 1847)

John W. Smoot, son of Horatio, was born September 24, 1809, in Charles
County. He married Mary Elizabeth Posey, born 1814, in Maryland, the
daughter of Vincent Posey. 

              Children of John W. and Mary Elizabeth (Posey) Smoot

    1. Eleanor B. Smoot, born 1832. 
    2. Lemuel Smoot, born 1836, married Mary ----. q.v. 
    3. Jane Catherine Smoot, born 1838. 
    4. David Smoot, born 1841. 


38


The will of John W. Smoot was dated February 14, 1847, and proved in
Charles County on March 16, 1847, by Sylvester W. Smoot, Mahalabel
Shorter, and Thomas Smoot. He bequeathed his entire estate to his wife
Mary Elizabeth during widowhood, then to his four named children. 

At the 1850 census his widow was domiciled in Allen's Fresh District of
Charles County, with realty assessed at $2,000. She subsequently married
Joseph F. Hayden who in 1852 was the guardian of Lemuel and David Smoot. 

                        ARMISTEAD SMOOT7
                            (1783 - 1845)

Armistead Smoot, son of John and Elizabeth (Grant) Smoot, was born about
1783 in Culpeper County, Virginia. He accompanied his parents to Hardin
County, Kentucky, where on December 28, 1803, by the Rev. Joseph Paddox
he was married to Nancy Riley, born 1784, in Pennsylvania. 

                 Children of Armistead and Anne (Riley) Smoot

    1. Ira Smoot, born 1804, married Minerva ----, born 1821, in Ark.; 
        lived in Sevier Co., Ark. Issues: Frances, born 1838; Roger, 
        born 1840; Mary, born 1842; John, born 1844; Matiida, born 
        1847; and Nancy, born 1850. 
    2. John Smoot, born 1805, married Lorinda ----, born 1811, in Ill.; 
        lived in Sevier Co., Ark. Issues: William, born 1833; Sarah, 
        born 1835; John, born 1845; Lorinda, born 1846; Tom Benton, 
        born 1848. 
    3. Norman Smoot, born 1812, married Evelane ----, born 1817, in 
        Ark. Issues: Charles, born 1835; Jane, born 1837; John, born 
        1839; Malissa, born 1842; Elizabeth, born 1845; William, born 
        1848. 
    4. Elijah Smoot, born 1822, in Ill. 
    5. Eleanor Smoot, born 1826, in Ark. 
    6. Bathenea Smoot, born 1831. 
    7. Elizabeth Smoot, born 1831, married Jacob Bradshaw, born 1827, 
        in Ark. 

On September 18, 1812, he enlisted as a private in Captain Aaron Hart's
Mounted Regiment of Kentucky Volunteers, and marched to Vincennes,
Territory of Indiana, where he was present at muster on September 28,
same year. He supplied his own horse which was appraised by the Army as
$87.00. He was discharged at Buseron, Indiana, on October 30, 1812, and
was allowed 8 days traveling expenses at 20 miles per day to his home in
Kentucky. 


39


After the war he left his home in Hardin County and lived for a while in
Illinois where his son Elijah was born in 1822. By 1826 he was
established in Sevier County, Arkansas, where he died on November 1,
1845. 

When his widow applied for bounty land in the fifties, John Smoot, Sr.,
of Marion County, Missouri, stated that he was present at the marriage
of Armistead and Nancy Riley, and that he served in the same company
with him during the War of 1812. 

On August 28, 1871, his widow of Scott County, Arkansas, applied for a
pension in right of her husband's services in the war, but her
application was rejected inasmuch as Armistead Smoot had been in the
service less than 60 days, the minimum time required to qualify for a
pension. At that time she was residing with her daughter, Elizabeth
Bradshaw, of Black Jack, Arkansas. Nearby was also her son Elijah Smoot
who was the head of a family with Susan Smoot, aged 37, and four other
members bearing the name of Skidmore. 

                          JOHN SMOOT7

John Smoot, son of John and Elizabeth (Grant) Smoot, was born in
Culpeper County, Virginia. He migrated to Hardin County, Kentucky, with
his parents, and there on December 8, 1804, he secured license to marry
Elizabeth Dale. On September 18, 1812, he enlisted as a private in
Captain John Thomas' Company of Kentucky Mounted Volunteers. In 1825 he
settled in Marion County, Missouri, where he was living when the widow
of his brother, Armistead, applied for bounty land. 

                        HUMPHREY SMOOT7

Humphrey Smoot, son of John and Elizabeth (Grant) Smoot, was born in
Culpeper County, Virginia. He accompanied his parents to Hardin County,
Kentucky, about 1795, where some years later he volunteered for the war
of 1812. He enlisted on September 18, 1812, in Captain John Thomas'
Company, of Kentucky Mounted Volunteers, and served also under Captain
Aaron Hart. He was present at muster at Vincennes, Territory of Indiana,
and was discharged on October 30, 1812, with his brothers Armistead and
John. He reenlisted later and mustered at Camp Jackson on December 31,
1814, and another record shows him a substitute for James Butler on May
18, 1815. He obtained license on August 30, 1816, in Hardin County to
marry Sarah Meeks. One son has been established--Humphrey Smoot who
married Lovina Fletcher. q.v.


40


                          ELIJAH SMOOT7
                            (1802 - 1888)

Elijah Smoot, son of John and Elizabeth (Grant) Smoot, was born April 4,
1802, in Kentucky. Upon majority he established his homestead near
Senora, Hardin County, where he is located at subsequent censuses. In
1880 he stated that he was born in Kentucky and that his father and
mother were born in Virginia. He married Elizabeth Jones, born 1803, who
stated in 1880 that she was born in Virginia as well as her father and
mother. Elijah Smoot died on April 5, 1888, in Kentucky. 

                 Children of Elijah and Elizabeth (Jones) Smoot

    1. Minerva Jane Smoot married Lovira J. Wright. License Hardin 
        Co., May 8, 1846. 
    2. Thornton Smoot, born 1828. 
    3. Julia Smoot, born 1829. 
    4. Emily Smoot, born May 16, 1831, died Feb. 9, 1909, married Josiah 
        Edward Best, Jr., born Aug. 3, 1825, died Mar. 19, 1900. License 
        Hardin Co., June 9, 1847. 
    5. Elizabeth Smoot, born 1835. 
    6. John Smoot, born 1838. 
    7. Lewis J. Smoot, born 1839, married Kathleen ----, born 1847. 
    8. Mary Smoot, born 1841. 
    9. Robert Smoot, born 1842. 
   10. Martha Smoot, born 1844. 
   11. Alice Smoot, born 1848. 

           LIEUT. WILLIAM ALGERNON SYDNEY SMOOT, U. S. A.8
                            (1845 - 1886)

William Algernon Sydney Smoot, son of Joseph and Anne (Darne) Smoot, was
born March 12, 1845, at Norfolk, Virginia, but spent his early days in
the National Capital. During the Civil War he served as First Lieutenant
of the First Maryland Regiment of Infantry of the Northern Forces. 

At Brookline, Massachusetts, on April 25, 1866, he married Mary Bangs,
born March 4, 1847, at Medford, Massachusetts, the daughter of Edward
Francis and Mary Hall (Bangs) Head. 

               Children of William Sydney and Mary (Head) Smoot

    1. William Sydney Smoot, born Feb. 25, 1868. 
    2. Sarah Marquard Smoot, born June 26, 1869. 
    3. Anna Titcomb Smoot, born Feb. 25, 1871, married April 11, 1898, 
        Patrick Tracy Jackson, born Nov. 7, 1871. Issues: Anna Loring, 


41


        born Oct. 5, 1904; Patrick Tracy, born Nov. 19, 1906; and 
        Jonathan, born Sept. 3, 1913. 
    4. Joseph Edward Smoot, born Oct. 9, 1873. 
    5. Charles Head Smoot, born Dec. 6, 1878, married Oct. 12, 1910, 
        Katherine Elizabeth Ryan. Issues: Mary Katherine; Charles 
        Head; and William Sydney. 
    6. Mary Smoot, born Feb. 25, 1880. 
    7. Margaret Smoot, born Aug. 14, 1885. 

William Sydney Smoot died on February 18, 1886, at Evanston, Illinois.
His will was admitted to
probate on April 19, 1886, at Suffock, Massachusetts, upon the testimony
of W. Marquand, A. E.
Beal, and Anne E. Smoot. His widow Mary Smoot was bequeathed the entire
estate, real and
personal. On February 6, 1891, Charles Head, of Boston, testified at the
settlement of the estate that
William S. Smoot last lived in Evanston, Illinois, and died possessed of
goods in the County of
Suffock, leaving a widow and seven minor children, all residents of
Evanston. 

                          AVERY SMOOT8
                            (1805 - 1866)

Avery Smoot, son of Samuel and Elizabeth (Reed) Smoot, was born
September 15, 1805, in Dorchester County, Maryland. His young manhood
was spent at the National Capital, where on November 22, 1832, he
secured license to marry Emily Hunter Terrett, of Fairfax County,
Virginia. He died on April 24, 1866, and was interred in Congressional
Cemetery, Washington. The following children were remembered by a
descendant. 

                 Children of Avery and Emily (Terrett) Smoot

    1. Julia West Smoot, born 1842, married Roland M. Jones, born 1840 
        in Penn. License Fairfax Co., Va., Nov. 8, 1871. 
    2. Elizabeth Terrett Smoot married A. M. Hughes, of Tenn. 
    3. Samuel Clement Smoot. 
    4. Edward Dade Smoot, born 1851. 

                  SAMUEL CLEMENT SMOOT, U. S. N.8
                            (1818 - 1867)

Samuel Clement Smoot, son of Samuel and Elizabeth (Kennedy) Smoot, was
born February 3, 1818, in the District of Columbia. There on April 29,
1846, he secured license to marry Emma, daughter of Thomas and Dorothy
Smallwood. He was a doctor of medicine and was at one time connected
with the faculty of the Medical College of George 


42


Washington University. Unlike most of his family who were actively
engaged in the cause of the Confederacy, he was of Northern sympathy,
and on October 5, 1861, he was commissioned an Assistant Surgeon in the
United States Navy. He resigned, however, on January 27, 1862, owing to
ill-health, and died during the year 1867. 

                Children of Samuel and Emma (Smallwood) Smoot

    1. Kenneth Russell Smoot, born Apr. 18, 1857, married Jane Eyer.
q.v. 
    2. Matilda Smoot, born June 23, 1859, died May 29, 1917, married 
        Duane Edwin, son of Perrin and Louisa Maria (Newton) Fox. 
        Issues: Dorothy; Frank Boughton; Newton Kennedy; and 
        Christine. 

                 MAJOR LUTHER RICE SMOOT, C. S. A.8
                            (1824 - 1892)

Luther Rice Smoot, son of Samuel and Elizabeth (Kennedy) Smoot, was born
September 24, 1824, in the District of Columbia. At Baltimore on June
10, 1844, he first married Sarah Edmondia, born November 20, 1825, the
daughter of Andrew Miller and Eliza (Upperman) Laub. 

                  Children of Luther and Sarah (Laub) Smoot

    1. Benjamin Stoddert Smoot married Mary Moore. q.v. 

Prior to the Civil War Luther Rice Smoot was a prominent banker and
leading financier of the National Capital, with a residence at one time
on Tenth Street. When Lincoln called for volunteers to coerce the South,
he departed immediately for Richmond, offered his services to the
Confederate Government, and received a commission with the grade of
Captain in the Quartermaster Department. He was later advanced to the
rank of major and assigned to the General Staff. 

After the war he settled in Baltimore. His wife died on May 21, 1869,
thereupon at Baltimore on November 16, 1871, he married Alice Slingluff,
of that well-known family of Southern Maryland. 

                 Children of Luther and Alice (Slingluff) Smoot

    2. Eliza Slingluff Smoot, born Nov. 3, 1872, married June 4, 1895, 
        Harry Courtney Shriver. Issue: Carrie Courtney, born June 2, 
        1896, married June 26, 1920, Marcellus Edward McDowell. 
    3. Charles Deardoeff Smoot, born Feb. 21, 1874, married June 7,
1913, 
        Lillian McCracken. 

Luther Rice Smoot maintained a prominent position in Baltimore until his
death on April 28, 1892, at his residence 1416 Bolton Street. 


43


                   WILLIAM HENRY SMOOT, C. S. A.8
                            (1845 - 1885)

William Henry Smoot, son of Joseph and Julia Anne (Dement) Smoot, was
born April 11, 1845, in Washington, D. C. At the outbreak of the Civil
War he was in school at Blacksburg, Virginia, and at the early age of 16
years he, with his entire class at school, enlisted in the Confederate
Army. He served faithfully throughout the War between the States and was
furloughed near Richmond. He made his way to Washington mostly on foot
only to find his mother's residence infested with hordes of negro
refugees. He then traveled to his grandmother's home in Maryland. And as
he was coming up the path to the house, his mother who was on the porch
saw an unkempt, emaciated man with several weeks' growth of beard and
bare-footed. She became alarmed and started to return to the house when
he cried, "Mother, don't you know me?" Her first remark was "But where
are your boots?" "I ate them before I left Richmond." 

In 1869 he married Lavania, the daughter of Matthew and Hannah
(Harrison) O'Brien, of Avandale, Fairfax County, Virginia. The license
was issued in Fairfax County and stated that the prospective bride was
aged 22 and was born in Baltimore, Maryland. William Henry Smoot died
about December 1, 1885. 

                Children of William and Lavania (O'Brien) Smoot

    1. 2. Two children died in infancy. 
    3. John D. Smoot married Emily Kenrick. q.v. 

                      THOMAS HENRY SMOOT8
                            (1822 - 1910)

Thomas Henry Smoot, son of Thomas and Rebecca (Robertson) Smoot, was
born November 13,
1822. He married Lovica Ann, born April 12, 1825, the daughter of Luke
and Nancy (Darby)
Hackett. He and his wife died during 1910 in Dorchester County,
Maryland. 

                Children of Thomas and Lovica (Hackett) Smoot

    1. William Perry Smoot married Eliza Jane Hackett. q.v. 
    2. Luke Henry Smoot married Rebecca Wheatley. q.v. 
    3. Sarah Smoot, born 1853, married Joseph Calloway. 
    4. Nancy Rebecca Smoot, born 1855, married George Russell. 
    5. Mary Elizabeth Smoot, born 1857, died 1876. 
    6. Janett Frances Smoot, born 1859, married George Hall. 


44


    7. Gulie Elma Smoot, born 1861, married William Mason. 
    8. Lovie Lee Smoot, born 1863, married Albert S. Hurtt. 
    9. Laura Lovicy Smoot, born 1866, died 1900, married Priestley 
        Wheatley. 
   10. Annie Thomas Smoot, born 1869, married John C. Hook. 

                     WILLIAM ROBERT SMOOT8
                            (1825 - 1893)

William Robertson Smoot, son of Thomas and Rebecca (Robertson) Smoot,
was born March 4, 1825, in Dorchester County, Maryland. On July 24,
1856, he married Elizabeth Davis, the daughter of Truston Polk and
Elizabeth (Davis) Cannon. 

                Children of William and Elizabeth (Cannon) Smoot

    1. Joanna Smoot, born 1857, died 1922, married W. H. Valliant and 
        P. H. McShane. 
    2. Truston Cannon Smoot married twice. q.v. 
    3. Melissa Elmer Smoot, born 1861, died 1916, married W. E Brown. 
    4. Estella Smoot, born 1863, died 1934, married Thomas Todd. 
    5. Rebecca Smoot, born 1866, married Walter Sparklin. 
    6. Elizabeth Augusta Smoot, born 1872, died 1931, married Linwood 
        Beauchamp and W. E. Brown. 

William Robertson Smoot was struck by a railroad train which was the
cause of his death on August 19, 1893. He was interred at Denton,
Maryland. His will was admitted to probate September 5, 1893, in
Caroline County, Maryland. 

                         LEMUEL SMOOT8
                            (1836 - 18--)

Lemuel Smoot, son of John W. and Mary Elizabeth (Posey) Smoot, was born
about 1836 in Charles County. He married Mary W. ----, born about 1842
in Maryland. According to the 1860 census, he was living near
Tompkinsville, Maryland, with his wife, infant daughter Lestine M.
Smoot, and his bachelor brother David. 

                     HUMPHREY SMOOT, C. S. A.8
                            (1820 - 1882)

Humphrey Smoot, son of Humphrey and Sarah (Meeks) Smoot, was born
January 7, 1820, presumably in Hardin County, Kentucky. On February 8,
1846, he married Lovina Fletcher, born June 12, 1830. 


45


               Children of Humphrey and Lovina (Fletcher) Smoot

    1. John Smoot, born July 14, 1847, died Dec. 26, 1867. 
    2. Maryan Smoot, born Oct. 17, 1848. 
    3. Evelyne Smoot, born June 10, 1851, died Apr. 9, 1902, married 
        Charles Smith. 
    4. Charles Smoot, born Nov. 10, 1854, died Apr. 28, 1860. 
    5. Catherine Smoot, born Aug. 25, 1856, died Feb. 22, 1859. 
    6. Samuel Smoot, born 1860, died 1861. 
    7. Sterling Smoot married Martha McGrath. q.v. 
    8. Addie Smoot, born Sept. 1, 1864, died 1865. 
    9. Helena M. Smoot, born Oct. 4, 1866, married Joseph Northmore. 
   10. Minnie M. Smoot, born May 12, 1869, married thrice. 
   11. Lucy Smoot, born Jan. 6, 1872, married Frank Stevenson. 
   12. Edith Smoot, born 1875, died 1878. 
   13. Ira Smoot. 

During the War between the States Humphrey Smoot served under General
Sterling Price of the Confederate Army. After the conflict, Humphrey
Smoot settled in Montana, and in the seventies, went to California,
where he died May 21, 1882. His widow died September 17, 1907. 

                     KENNETH RUSSELL SMOOT9
                            (1857 - 1932)

Kenneth Russell Smoot, son of Samuel Clement and Emma (Smallwood) Smoot,
was born April 18, 1857, at Washington, D. C. He married Jane, the
daughter of Daniel and Nancy Bennett Eyer. 

                  Children of Kenneth and Jane (Eyer) Smoot

    1. Clement Eyer Smoot, born Apr. 7, 1884, married Madge Miller. 
        Issues: Frederick Miller, born Mar. 30, 1912; Clement Eyer, 
        born Jan. 30, 1914; and Peter, born Sept. 13, 1920. 
    2. Eleanor Smoot, born Dec. 12, 1885, married Samuel Spelman 
        Holmes. Issues: Samuel Spelman, born July 17, 1911; Kenneth 
        Smoot, born Nov. 19, 1912; Jane Eyer, born Jan. 29, 1914; John 
        Russel, born Nov. 15, 1915; Alice, born Apr. 16, 1920; and
David, 
        born Sept. 16, 1921. 
    3. Emma Smoot, born Jan. 6, 1893, married Ernest Ford Nolting. 
        Issues: William Thomas, born May 6, 1920; and Mary Jane, 
        born Jan. 28, 1930. 

Kennth Russell Smoot maintained his home at one time in Chicago, from
which place in 1908 he settled in California where he died May 29, 1932. 


46


                    BENJAMIN STODDERT SMOOT9
                            (1856 - 1901)

Benjamin Stoddert Smoot, son of Luther and Sarah (Laub) Smoot,. was born
January 21, 1856, in the National Capital. On January 30, 1878, he
married Mary Gideon, daughter of William George and Mary Gideon (Rose)
Moore, at Baltimore, Maryland. He died in the South about 1901. 

                 Children of Benjamin and Mary (Moore) Smoot

    1. Mary Moore Smoot, born Nov. 16, 1878, at Phila., died Feb. 17, 
        1920, married first William Hamilton Edwards on Sept. 29, 1897, 
        and second Emil C. Wagner. Issues (first): William George 
        Edwards, born Nov. 22, 1898; Charles Francis Edwards, died 
        young; and Hugh Stanford Edwards, born July 5, 1906. 
    2. Perry Myers Smoot married twice. q.v. 

                         JOHN D. SMOOT9

John D. Smoot, son of William and Lavania (O'Brien) Smoot, was born
November 27, 1873. In Baltimore on August 24, 1895, he married Emily,
the daughter of Joseph and Emily Kendrick, of Washington, D. C. One
son--John Henry Smoot--was born. (q.v.) John D. Smoot resides in the
National Capital. 

                      WILLIAM PERRY SMOOT9
                            (1848 - 1918)

William Perry Smoot, son of Thomas Henry and Lovica Ann (Hackett) Smoot,
was born November 8, 1848. On August 11, 1870, he married Eliza Jane,
born October 11, 1843, the daughter of Thomas and Emaline (Wheatley)
Hackett. He resided in Dorchester County, where he died April 26, 1918.
His widow died on August 3, 1923. 

               Children of William Perry and Eliza (Hackett) Smoot

    1. Thomas Luther Smoot, born June 16, 1871, married Mary Elizabeth, 
        dau. of Joseph H. C. and Nancy (Lankford) Bryan. Issues: 
        Ernest Rutherford Smoot(*), born July 9, 1901; Harlon Clay 
        Smoot, born June 28, 1904. 
    2. William Edgar Smoot, born 1875, died 1876. 
    3. Rutherford Burchard Smoot, born Aug. 18, 1879, died July 6, 1934, 
        married Nov. 30, 1904, Cora Ellen, born Oct. 24, 1881, dau. of 
        Samuel and Margaret (Philips) Cole. 


(*)Note: He married April 28, 1929, Hilda Lucile, dau. of Norwood and 
Addie (Plummer) Conrey. 


47


                       LUKE HENRY SMOOT9

Luke Henry Smoot, son of Thomas and Lovica Ann (Hackett) Smoot, was born
October 12, 1850.
He married on April 19, 1876, Rebecca, daughter of Jesse K. and Margaret
Wheatley. His wife
died February 28, 1918. 

                Children of Luke and Rebecca (Wheatley) Smoot

    1. Homer Smoot, married Geneva Cordy. q.v. 
    2. Irving F. Smoot married Bessie D. Wilson. q.v. 
    3. Florence Smoot, born Aug. 16, 1889, married Nov. 26, 1914, Curtis 
        Wolf. 

                     TRUSTON CANNON SMOOT9
                            (1859 - 1928)

Truston Cannon Smoot, son of William Robertson and Elizabeth Davis
(Cannon) Smoot, was born October 24, 1859. He married first Fannie M.
Griffith, daughter of William J. and Drucilla (Clayvelle) Griffith, on
April 10, 1889. 

                 Children of Truston and Fannie (Griffith) Smoot

    1. Harvey Clinton Smoot, born Aug. 27, 1891, married Sophia 
        Schwartz. 
    2. Ralph Griffith Smoot, born Nov. 21, 1893, married Ivy Ruth Curry. 
    3. Aubrey Cannon Smoot, born Aug. 29, 1898, married Jan. 17, 1925, 
        Eleanor Virginia Norris. Issues: Aubrey Cannon, born Nov. 19, 
        1925; William Norris, born Feb. 4, 1928. 
    4. Merrill Clayvelle Smoot, born Sept. 15, 1902, married Helen 
        Jossephine Rouse. 

His first wife died September 9, 1924, thereupon he married secondly
Laura Cannon, a kinswoman. He was a minister of the Methodist Episcopal
Church, with charges on the Eastern Shore and in Delaware. He died April
23, 1928; his widow survived until January 16, 1935. 

                      STERLING PRICE SMOOT9

Sterling Price Smoot, son of Humphrey and Lovina (Fletcher) Smoot, was
born December 18, 1861, in Kentucky. He married on June 21, 1888, Martha
J. McGrath, born April 14, 1869. 

                Children of Sterling and Martha (McGrath) Smoot

    1. Leslie Raymond Smoot, born Oct. 19, 1889. 
    2. Harold James Smoot, born Aug. 30, 1891, married Hazel Smith. 
    3. Newell Smoot, born Mar. 24, 1893. 


48


    4. Helen Mildred Smoot, born June 21, 1894, died 1907. 
    5. Forrest Vern Smoot, born Aug. 11, 1896, married Nov. 28, 1917, 
        Anna Vandegrift Gibson, born May 14, 1900. Issues: Virginia 
        Marion, born Feb. 19, 1920, and Maxine Ann, born Jan. 11, 1930. 
    6. Stanley Smoot, born July 21, 1899. 
    7. Leland Price Smoot, born Apr. 12, 1903, married Esther Horst. 

                  COLONEL PERRY MYERS SMOOT10

Perry Myers Smoot, son of Benjamin Stoddert and Mary (Moore) Smoot, was
born April 22, 1882, in Washington, D. C. At that place on November 29,
1905, he married Mary Catherine, the daughter of William and Mary
Catherine (Busey) Henry. She died in Honolulu on November 6, 1930, and
on March 24, 1932, he married Caroline Vedder, of Springville, New York.
Perry Smoot is the Adjutant General of the Territorial Militia of
Hawaii, with the rank of colonel. 

               Children of Perry and Mary Catherine (Henry) Smoot

    1. Christine Kenning Smoot, born Sept. 25, 1906. 
    2. Richard Henry Smoot, born July 10, 1910, married July 2, 1932, 
        Norda Prebble Bailey, of Berkeley, Cal. Issue: Donna Mary, 
        born July 1, 1933. 
    3. John van der Poel Smoot, born Aug. 14, 1913. 
    4. Robert Moore Smoot, born Oct. 12, 1914. 

                       JOHN HENRY SMOOT10

John Henry Smoot, son of John D. and Emily (Kenrick) Smoot, was born in
Washington, D. C. His first marriage occurred in 1919, when he wedded
Mildred Hurd, by whom one child, Mildred MacLeod, was born on February
26, 1921. On November 5, 1929, he married Marion Elton, who became the
mother of his son, John Henry II, on September 1, 1932. He maintains his
residence in New York City, where he is engaged in patent law. 

                         HOMER SMOOT10
                            (1878 - 1929)

Homer Smoot, son of Luke Henry and Rebecca (Wheatley) Smoot, was born
March 23, 1878, and died March 23, 1929. He married Geneva Gordy and
maintained his residence at Sharptown, Maryland. 


49


                 Children of Homer and Geneva (Gordy) Smoot

    1. Roger Lee Smoot, born Nov. 6, 1905, married Ida Friese, of W. Va. 
        Issues: Roger Lee, born Apr. 22, 1930; Geneva Eloise, born 
        July 24, 1931. 
    2. Eleanor Smoot, born 1907, died 1913. 
    3. Francis Lucille Smoot, born Mar. 1909. 
    4. Alexander Smoot. 
    5. Jeanette Irving Smoot, born Feb. 28, 1919. 

                        IRVING F. SMOOT10

Irving F. Smoot, son of Luke Henry and Rebecca (Wheatley) Smoot, was
born January 23, 1884. He married on March 2, 1910, Bessie, daughter of
Ezikel and Louise Wilson. 

                 Children of Irving and Bessie (Wilson) Smoot

    1. Louise D. Smoot, born Jan. 7, 1911, married Feb. 14, 1935, Walter 
        McNeilly. 
    2. Rebecca L. Smoot, born Nov. 30, 1913, married Dec. 26, 1930, Dale 
        Wheatley. 
    3. William I. Smoot, born Sept. 30, 1915. 
    4. Anne Wilson Smoot, born May 24, 1925. 


50


THOMAS SMOOT, GENT.2
(1634 - 1668)

It is believed that Thomas, son of William Smoot, was born on the other
side and brought to Virginia by his parent at an early age. The birth of
Thomas' eldest son is proved as 1656, and considering that he were 21
years of age at time of marriage, it would place his birth around 1634.
After his settlement in Maryland Thomas Smoot married Jane, the sister
of Captain William Batten, of Pickawaxon Hundred, Charles County. The
fact that Thomas died intestate has added much to the confusion of the
earlier generations and a complete list of his children has not been
established. William and Thomas as his sons are proved conclusively, and
James is accepted by the fact that he (James) patented a portion of
"Smoot's Chance" which had been surveyed for Thomas Smoot who died
before the warrant was issued. Edward as a son is merely inferred,
inasmuch as he was of that generation and that he cannot be placed
satisfactorily elsewhere. It is reasonable to assume that there were
daughters born to the union, but none have been proved. 


Children of Thomas and Jane (Batten) Smoot
1. James Smoot. q.v. 
2. Thomas Smoot married Elizabeth Barton. q.v. 
3. William Smoot married twice. q.v. 
4. Edward Smoot married Susan ----. q.v. 

The fact that William, the son of Thomas Smoot, was made an heir in the
will of his maternal uncle, Captain William Batten, presents a very
interesting court case, showing several connections by blood as well as
by marriage. Captain William Batten, born in the year 1618, was one of
the early, interesting planters on the Wicomico and probably derived his
title from his seafaring adventures. He was apparently a man of some
wealth as my be judged by the number of servants he brought to Maryland.
And it is sometimes believed that he settled first in Virginia. On
January 1, 1652, he demanded from His Lordship 650 acres of land for the
transportation of himself, his wife Margarey, his wife's daughter Lydia
Ashcomb, his servants George Newman, Richard ----, and Susannah ----,
and a servant Robert Joyce whom he had purchased from Robert Brooke and
for whom he was to have 50 acres of land.

51


Captain Batten was unable to write his name, but it is interesting to note 
that George Newman whom he transported as his servant and who later 
married his step-daughter signed his name to all official documents. 
Batten pursued the occupation of both merchant and planter. As a 
merchant he extended credit quite freely to his neighbors, almost too 
freely, for he was frequently entering suits for non-payment of debts. He 
also brought action in several of the Virginia county courts. He also 
observed the law with mental reservations and as a consequence had the 
distinction of being fined for "selling wine and strong drink" without a 
license. 

Captain Batten created a large landed estate for the few years he was a 
resident of the Province, and is conspicuous in that he was one of the first 
eight men to receive grants upon the Patapsco River. In 1652 he and 
Thomas Thomas were granted jointly 1,150 acres of land called "Old 
Road" in what is now Baltimore County. Before receiving his Patapsco 
grant, he had obtained numerous other tracts mostly in southern 
Maryland. 

In 1654 he was styled as a "planter of the Patuxent" and was issued a 
warrant for 240 acres called "Wakefield". Later an addition of 400 acres 
was surveyed for him. He also obtained an adjacent tract known as 
"Williamsby". On May 24, 1655, he purchased from Lieut-Col. Samuel 
Smith "Cedar Point" a 500-acre tract on the Potomac River, a name still 
retained today. In 1654/5 he added a tract of land called "Batten" to his 
estate. In 1658 he patented "Indian Spring" of 150 acres in Calvert 
County and "Batten's Clifts" of 350 acres in Charles County. In February 
1662/3, he had 1,000 acres of "Batten's Dale" surveyed for him on the 
west side of the Wicomico River. Thus before his death, he had acquired 
a landed estate of something like 4,000 acres. 

His death occurred a few days before the warrant was issued to him for 
"Batten's Dale", and Josias Fendall whom he named as one of the 
overseers in his will and whom his widow later made her attorney 
appeared to have obtained in some way this last named tract. The other 
overseers were Robert Henley and his "brother-in-law" William Smute. 
His will was probated in 1662. He bequeathed his widow Margarey one-
half of his realty. His widow shortly afterwards married John Bowles. 
Other bequests were to his "daughter" Lydia Newman and her husband 
George Newman whom he called son and their children--George, 
William, and Margarey. Legacies were willed to his sister Jane Smute, to 
his friends Charity Adams and William Love, while the residue of his 
personal estate was devised to his nephew William Smute. 


52

His widow died shortly after her marriage to John Bowles, Gent. The 
latter by his will proved in Charles County during 1675/6, named no 
heirs of his body but left a large estate to his nephew James Tyre, with 
"George Newman Jr., son of George Newman" as the contingent heir in 
the event that James Tyre died without issues. 
James Tyre accordingly administered on the estate of his uncle John 
Bowles and thus became possessed of the estate, a large portion of which 
formerly belonged to Captain Batten. Tyre died, whereas his widow 
Rebecca married Robert Yates who became ipso facto the executors of 
the estate of Captain Batten which at that day remained unsettled. 
In 1682 William Smoot, the nephew of Captain Batten, and the named 
heir in his will for the residuary estate was of full age, therefore, he 
brought suit against Robert Yates for his share of the estate. In 1694 the 
lawsuit was again before the provincial court and brought forward certain 
testimonies. 

Robert Yates and Rebecca his wife declared that they believed the legacy 
had been paid to William Smoot. Lydia Manners testified that she had 
heard her husband George Manners say that Thomas Smoot received six 
chairs of the estate. 

James Witcherly declared that James Bowles sent his man to Mrs. 
Rowland and requested her to meet him at the home of Captain Fendall. 
Upon her return, he heard Mrs. Rowland, mother to William Smoot, say 
"they had made an end of Battin's estate". 

Mary Brown testified that she heard Robert Rowland "who married the 
said William Smoot's mother" say that when William Smoot came of age 
he had 10,000 pounds of tobacco to be paid from his uncle's estate. 
Eleanor Bean testified that she heard that Thomas Smoot, the father of 
William, had sold his part of the estate to Captain Fendall. Humphrey 
Warren certified that he had heard it said that Captain Fendall "cheated" 
Smoot. 

Returning to Thomas Smoot who was deceased at the time of his son's 
law suit, we find him on October 1, 1662, receiving from his "brother-in-
law" William Barton Jr. land which the latter held in trust for his ward 
William Hungerford, son of William deceased. In 1665 Thomas Smoot 
transferred the trustship to his father William Smoot Sr. with the 
stipulation for the return of the said trust in the event of the father's death 
during the minority of the orphan. 

On August 4, 1665, "Smoot's Choice" was surveyed for him containing 
250 acres. At a later rent roll 150 acres were possessed by Thomas 
Morris and 100 acres by William Hungerford. About this time or 

53

before Thomas Smoot acquired from Thomas Gerard "Wicomico Fields" 
a tract of 500 acres lying on the west bank of the Wicomico River 
originally granted by patent to Thomas Hatton. This tract by resurveys 
and later additions developed into a much larger estate and became the 
traditional home of one branch of the Smoot family until the nineteenth 
century. 

Thomas Smoot died intestate in Charles County perhaps during the early 
part of 1668. The court on February 2, of that year, granted letters of 
administration to Jane Smoot, the relict. Richard Smoot and William 
Smoot were her bondsmen. His estate was appraised at 42,075 pounds of 
tobacco by Humphrey Warren and Robert Henley. His widow shortly 
afterwards married Robert Rowland who rendered an account to the court 
on April 8, 1669. 


JAMES SMOOT3

The first mention in public records of James Smoot, son of Thomas and 
Jane (Batten) Smoot, was in November 1681, when he received 230 
pounds of tobacco for the performance of some public act, believed to be 
for service in one of the early Indian wars. Inasmuch as he was of 
sufficient age to bear arms in 1681, he was apparently born prior to 1665. 
On April 15, 1687, he patented 160 acres of "Smoot's Chance", lying in 
Charles County. On February 21, 1689, at Port Tobacco he contracted a 
debt of 800 pounds of tobacco with Edward Ford; in 1693 he was named 
as an heir in the will of James Lambert. He, however, died or left the 
county shortly afterwards, for about 1694 Edward Ford appointed 
William Stone his attorney to collect the debt of James Smoot, at which 
time the latter is referred to as late of Charles County. No further record 
of him exists or neither a marriage nor children have been proved. His 
land "Smoot's Chance" was later held by John Wilder and John Baptist 
Boarman. 


54


CAPTAIN THOMAS SMOOT, GENT.3
Thomas Smoot, son of Thomas and Jane (Batten) Smoot, was born in 
Pickawaxon Hundred, Charles County. He married Elizabeth Barton who 
on June 15, 1688, described in the deed as "Elizabeth the wife of Thomas 
Smoot", received from her parents, William Barton and Mary his wife, 
certain property recorded as deeds of gift for the consideration of love 
and natural affections. 


Children of Thomas and Elizabeth (Barton) Smoot
1. Mary Smoot married John Bennett. 
2. Barton Smoot married twice. q.v. 
3. Thomas Smoot married Abigail ----. q.v. 
4. Charles Smoot married thrice. q.v. 
5. William Smoot. q.v. 
6. John Nathan Smoot, d.s.p. 
7. Elizabeth Smoot. 
8. Rachel Smoot married Matthew, son of John and Elizabeth Stone. 
9. Anne Smoot. 


In 1688 Thomas Smoot patented "Smoot's Chance" of 160 acres. On 
August 11, 1690, Thomas Smoot, Carpenter, deeded to John Wilder for 
8,000 pounds of tobacco "Cabbin Land" adjoining "Smoot's Discovery" 
and the land adjacent to Richard Harrison lying on Smoot's Creek and the 
Wicomico River. 

In 1696 Thomas Smoot was listed as a military and civil officer of 
Charles County.1 Subsequent records refer to him as captain. On May 4, 
1703, he was commissioned High Sheriff of Charles County. 
The will of Thomas Smoot was dated January 6, 1704, and proved in 
Charles County on January 30, 1704/5 by Thomas Whichaley, Thomas 
Careless, Samuel Durham, and James Sewell. He named his eldest son 
Barton the executor with his brother-in-law Lieutenant-Colonel William 
Barton, but in the event that Colonel Barton died during the minority of 
his son, then Thomas Taney, Richard Harrison, Robert Yates, and 
William Harbert were to administer on the estate. 
Thomas and Charles received jointly 150 acres of "Robbin" and "Gwin's 
Choice", 32 acres adjoining called "Cabbin", 21 acres of "Bargain", all 
lying on the west side of the Wicomico River. On the condition that 
Thomas and Charles died without issues, then the land was to revert to 
William and John Nathan. The latter two sons received 

1Archives, vol. 20, p. 543. 


55


direct 200 acres of land at their majority. The four daughters--Elizabeth, 
Rachel, Anne, and Mary--received personalty. 
The inventory of his personal estate was filed in 1705, with Charles 
Jones and William Martin as the appraisers. An account was rendered by 
his executor Barton Smoot on November 22, 1706. 
His eldest daughter Mary married John Bennett who on March 9, 1705, 
conveyed to William Smoot and John Nathan Smoot for 3,000 pounds of 
tobacco "Skipton" lying in Charles County. The deed read as follows 
"Captain Thomas Smoot late of Charles County deceased in his lifetime 
... and said Thomas Smoot by last will did devise the parcel of land to 
William and John Nathan Smoot". Both Mary and her husband made 
their mark. 

"Skipton" of 200 acres was surveyed July 22, 1672, for Robert Casseton, 
adjoining the lands of John Cane and Garrett Sinnett. This tract later 
became the seat of Barton Smoot whose widow was seized of the entire 
tract at the rent roll of 1753. Inasmuch as John Nathan Smoot was willed 
this tract jointly with his brother, and no deed is available to show the 
conveyance to Barton Smoot, though several deed books are missing in 
Charles County, it therefore can be established that Barton inherited or 
purchased it from his brother, John Nathan, who apparently died without 
issues. No further record of John Nathan is found beyond the year 1705. 


56


CAPTAIN BARTON SMOOT4
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS

Barton Smoot, eldest son of Thomas and Elizabeth (Barton) Smoot, was 
born 1688 in Pickawaxon Hundred, Charles County. At the death of his 
father in 1704, he was referred to as a minor, but at the subsequent death 
of his uncle, William Barton, he completed the administration of his 
parent's estate. 

He married Sarah, widow of Henry Hawkins, apparently a woman his 
senior by several years. Henry Hawkins in his will, proved January 12, 
1702/3, named his wife Sarah, and the following children--Alexander, 
Tubman, Elizabeth, and Eleanor. On March 11, 1712, Barton Smoot and 
Sarah his wife deeded to the latter's son Henry Hawkins, a tract of land in 
Charles County. At a subsequent rent roll of Prince Georges County, 
"Barton Smoot by marrying the widow of Henry Hawkins" was in 
possession of 300 acres of "Stone Hill", adjoining "Notley", surveyed 
1669 for Edward Mattox. 


Children of Barton and Sarah Barton
1. Barton Smoot married twice. q.v. 
2. Isaac Smoot married Elizabeth ----. q.v. 
3. William Smoot married Eleanor ----. q.v. 
4. Thomas Smoot married Eleanor ----. q.v. 
5. Elizabeth Smoot married ---- Gwyther. 

His wife Sarah was living as late as August 1718, when she witnessed the 
will of Edward Philpot. She predeceased her husband, however, for he 
took as a second wife Anne, the widow of Randolph Brandt, with the 
following children--Randolph, Catherine, Anne, and Mary. In 1731 
Barton Smoot swore to be 43 years of age, and was styled in court as 
Captain Barton Smoot. 

He negotiated a number of land surveys, beginning first in 1725 when he 
patented "Smoot's Fish Pond," of 100 acres, lying on the west side of 
Zachiah Swamp. This was followed in 1727 with "Smoot's Swamp" of 50 
acres, "Smoot's Delight" of 88 acres in 1734, and "Smoot's Swamp 
Addition" of 35 acres in 1740. 

The will of Barton Smoot was dated September 22, 1744, and proved in 
Charles County on February 16, 1744/5, by Philip Dorney, Tobias 
Cookhagen, and Margaret Cookhagen. His wife Anne received the 
dwelling-plantation known as "Skipton" of 200 acres, which adjoined 

57

the dwelling-plantation of his son Barton, "Fish Pond" of 100 acres, and 
one-third of the personal estate. 

Barton was bequeathed 200 acres of "Brian Clifts", "Mount Chesham" of 
68 acres, "Marsh Land" of 100 acres, the land purchased from John 
Hamill during life then to the "testator's grandson Henry Smoot and for 
the want of heirs to George Smoot". 

Isaac was devised "Smoot's Delight" of 68 acres, "Smoot's Swamp" of 50 
acres, and "Smoot's Swamp Addition", and 68 acres of "Lomax". 
William was willed "Barton's Hope" of 100 acres, a portion of "Daniel's 
Mount", and 100 acres of "Monday's Disappointment". 

In the event that Thomas refused to make a good deed of 100 acres of 
"Monday's Disappointment" to William, then he should have in lieu 
thereof 100 acres of "Smoot's Fish Pond". 

The residue of the estate was to be divided among the four sons and 
daughter Elizabeth Gwyther. The widow and son Thomas were named as 
executors. 

The will of his widow Anne Smoot was dated August 7, 1758, and 
proved in Charles County on March 5, 1759, with Charles Smoot and 
Mary Smoot as executors. The following shared in her estate--
grandchildren: Henry Hawkins (whose wife was Elizabeth); Randolph 
Brandt; Elizabeth Hawkins; Thomas Hawkins (whose wife was 
Catherine); Sarah Watts; and Richard Brandt: -- great grandchildren: 
Alexander Hawkins, of Thomas; William Watts; Elizabeth Watts, of 
Sarah; and Anne Hendley Hawkins, of Henry. She also named her son-
in-law Charles Smoot and Mary Smoot his wife, and the following of no 
stated relationship--Hendley Smoot, of Charles; John Nathan Smoot; 
William Barton Smoot; and Mary Smoot, daughter of Charles Smoot. 


BARTON SMOOT5
(1711 - 1760)

Barton Smoot, son of Barton and Sarah Smoot, was born 1711 in Charles 
County. He married first Jane, daughter of Thomas and Sarah (Briscoe) 
Truman. Sarah, as the widow of both Thomas Truman and William 
Stevens Howard, named her grandson Henry Smoot in her will of 1735, 
but she failed to mention her daughter Jane Smoot which would tend to 
indicate the latter's decease before that year. George Dent and Anne 
Smoot, however, were witnesses. 


Children of Barton and Jane (Truman) Smoot
1. Henry Smoot married Jane ----, d.s.p. 1759, naming wife Jane; 
brothers Barton, Thomas, George; and sister Eleanor. 


58


Barton Smoot married secondly a daughter of George Clarke who, in his 
will dated May 13, 1751, and proved in St. Mary's County, named his 
daughter Susannah Mackall Smoot. 


Children of Barton and Susannah (Clarke) Smoot
2. George Clarke Smoot married Sarah ----. q.v. 
3. William Barton Smoot married Elizabeth ----. q.v. 
4. Thomas Smoot, d.s.p. S. M. Co., named sister Elizabeth Philpot. 
He was surety for his sister Hannah Watts when the latter 
administered on estate of Joshua Watts. 
5. Eleanor Smoot married ---- Tabbs. Issues: Theophilus; Mary; 
Susannah Mackall. 
6. Hannah Smoot married Joshua Watts. Issues: Susannah and 
Barton. 
7. Elizabeth Smoot married Aug. 1, 1786, Benjamin Philpot. 
8. Susannah Mackall Smoot. 

Barton Smoot settled in St. Mary's County, where he died during 1760. 
His will, dated January 19, 1760, was witnessed by John A. Clarke, 
William Watts, and Elizabeth Gwyther. He left his widow a life interest 
in his entire estate which was to be divided equally among all his 
children at her death. The inventory was returned in 1761, when his 
personal estate showed an appraisement of œ721/13/5. George Gwyther 
and William Gwyther Jr. signed as the nearest of kin. His widow, 
Susannah Mackall Smoot, rendered an account on October 30, 1765. 
In March 1777, Susannah Mackall Smoot, widow, was named an heir in 
the will of her bachelor brother, John Attaway Clarke, as well as five 
nieces of the testator--Elizabeth Smoot, Susannah Smoot, Elizabeth 
Chesley, Anne Watts, and Susannah Watts. 

The will of Susannah Mackall Smoot was dated September 26, 1780, and 
admitted to probate in St. Mary's County on March 27, 1781, by Abner 
Wherritt, William Hammett Wherritt, and Eleanor Wherritt. She willed 
her sons William Barton Smoot and Thomas Smoot the dwelling-
plantation, with several adjoining tracts, and various bequests to her 
daughters--Elizabeth Smoot, Susannah Smoot, and Hannah Watts--and 
also to the following grandchildren--Theophilus Tabbs, Alexander 
Smoot, Wilkes Smoot, Mary Tabbs, Susannah Mackall Smoot, and 
Susannah Mackall Tabbs. 


ISAAC SMOOT5
(17-- - 175-)

Isaac Smoot, son of Barton and Sarah Smoot, was born in Pickawaxon 
Hundred, Charles County. His wife was Elizabeth ----. 

59


Children of Isaac and Elizabeth Smoot
1. Barton Smoot, born Nov. 1, 1740. q.v. 
2. Sarah Anne Smoot, born June 4, 1744, died Aug. 30, 1820, married 
John Dodson, died 1805. Issues: Henry; Robert; John Smoot; 
Middleton; Eleanor; and Sarah Anne. 
3. Isaac Smoot, born Dec. 2, 1745. q.v. 
4. William Smoot, born Sept. 11, 1748, d.s.p. 

Isaac Smoot died intestate. His widow as administratrix on November 1, 
1752, distributed the proceeds to the four children. John McPherson and 
William Smoot were her bondsmen. 

William Smoot, the bachelor and youngest son, served as a lieutenant in 
the Maryland Line during the Revolution, and was the only member of 
the Smoot family to receive the high distinction of being a charter 
member of the Society of the Cincinnati. He died sometime before 1800. 

The membership of Lieutenant Smoot in the Society of the Cincinnati is 
now represented, through his sister Sarah Anne (Smoot) Dodson, by his 
great-great-great-great nephew, Judge William Breckenridge Ardery, of 
Paris, Kentucky, and the grandson of Sarah Isabella Dodson by her 
marriage in 1854 to Robert Ferris Adair. 

On February 24, 1827, his niece, Elizabeth (Smoot) Radcliffe, of Prince 
William County, Virginia, applied to the Land Office for bounty land in 
right as one of his heirs. She certified that she was the daughter of his 
brother, Barton Smoot, and that the heirs of William Smoot, besides 
herself were the children of William's sister, Sarah Dodson, that is, 
Henry, Robert, John, Middleton, Eleanor, and Sarah all of Prince 
Georges County, Maryland. Her statement was proved by Samuel Smoot 
and Joseph Radcliffe both of Washington, D. C. who swore that 
Elizabeth Radcliffe was the niece of William Smoot, and the only child 
of the latter's brother Barton. A warrant was issued for 200 acres of land 
on March 24, 1827. 


WILLIAM SMOOT5
(17-- - 1753)
William Smoot, son of Barton and Sarah Smoot, was born in Charles 
County, Maryland. His wife was Eleanor ----. 


Children of William and Eleanor Smoot
1. Eleanor Smoot, born Jan. 1740. 
2. Thomas Smoot, born Dec. 1742, married Elizabeth ----. q.v. 
3. William Smoot, born Aug. 1751. q.v. 

60

William Smoot died intestate. The inventory of his personal effects was 
made on March 8, 1753, with his widow as the administratrix. Thomas 
Smoot and Alexander Hawkins signed as the next of kin, while Gustavus 
Brown and John Semple signed as the greatest creditors. The proceeds 
were distributed on May 12, 1754, to the widow, who at that date had 
married Benjamin Thomas, and to the three named children. Henry 
Martin and John McPherson were the sureties. 


THOMAS SMOOT5
(1707 - 1777)
Thomas Smoot, son of Barton and Sarah Smoot, was born in the year 
1707, for as Thomas Smoot "Jr." he was 60 years of age in 1767, and 
declared himself to be the son of Captain Barton Smoot. His wife was 
Eleanor ----. 


Children of Thomas and Eleanor Smoot
1. William Barton Smoot married Margaret Dodson. q.v. 
2. Thomas Smoot, d.s.p. 
3. John Smoot, died before 1777. 
4. Sarah Smoot married ---- Barnes. 
5. Elizabeth Smoot married ---- Barnes. 
6. Catherine Smoot. 
On June 15, 1745, Thomas Smoot and Anne Smoot, presumably his 
stepmother, deeded a portion of "Skipton" to the Rev. Mr. Henry Ogle, 
rector of Port Tobacco Parish. Eleanor Smoot wife of Thomas 
acknowledged the conveyance. In 1752 he petitioned the court to 
perpetuate the boundaries of "Smoot's Fish Pond", whereupon Daniel of 
St. Thomas Jenifer, Daniel Jenifer, Charles Courts, and Notley Maddox 
were appointed to the commission. 
On October 30, 1765, Thomas Smoot, Jr., conveyed "Monday's 
Disappointment" of 68 acres to Thomas Smoot. Eleanor at this date 
waived her dower. In 1771 he deeded to his son Thomas "Skipton" of 
200 acres and at the same time to his son John "Smoot's Fish Pond" of 
100 acres. The fact that no wife acknowledged the last two conveyances 
is evidence that she was deceased by that year. 
The will of Thomas Smoot was dated November 10, 1775, and proved in 
Charles County on July 5, 1777. William Barton received negroes, 
Thomas "Skipton," while John was willed "Smoot's Fish Pond" of 118 
acres and "Smoot's Venture" of 118 acres. The latter tract had been 
resurveyed from "Johnston" and "Strife". His daughter Sarah Barnes was 
devised certain personalty as well as her daughters, Elizabeth, 

61

Eleanor, and Victoria Barnes. His other daughters Catherine Smoot and 
Eleanor Barnes also received various bequests. All children were to share 
his pew in Port Tobacco Parish, and were to share equally in the residue 
of the estate. All three sons were named as executors. 
The inventory of the personal estate was taken on September 27, 1777, 
and appraised at œ1,263/8/3, with Matthew Barnes and William Barnes 
as the next of kin. William Barton Smoot and Thomas Smoot signed as 
the "surviving executors". At that time it was therefore conclusive that 
John the third son was deceased. 
A court record of 1778 states that Matthew Barnes intermarried with one 
of the daughters of Thomas Smoot, deceased, and that William Barton 
Smoot and Thomas Smoot were executors of the said Thomas. 
The first and only account on the estate was rendered on April 4, 1791, 
when it was stated that œ1,744/9/4 were to be divided according to the 
will. Walter Morris and Edward Ware were sureties for the executors. 
His son Thomas became an invalid and apparently did not marry as may 
be judged from the will of his brother William Barton Smoot in 1817. 
Thomas Smoot in 1785 was seized of 200 acres of "Skipton" in Port 
Tobacco West Hundred. 


GEORGE CLARKE SMOOT6
(17-- - 1779)
George Clarke Smoot, son of Barton and Susannah Mackall (Clarke) 
Smoot, was born in Charles County. He married Sarah, the widow of 
John Fendall. On February 8, 1765, Philip Richard Fendall and George 
Smoot and Sarah his wife executors of John Fendall late of Charles 
County, deceased, petitioned Daniel Jenifer, Gent., Deputy 
Commissioner, for a settlement of the estate. 


Children of George Clarke and Sarah Smoot
1. Susannah Mackall Smoot. 
2. Wilks Smoot. q.v. 
3. John Alexander Smoot married Abigail Hunter Tabbs. q.v. 
4. George Clarke Smoot married Matilda ----. q.v. 
5. Philip Barton Smoot married Maria ----. q.v. 
6. Frances Smoot. 
George Clarke Smoot established his seat in William and Mary Parish, 
where his ancestors previously had lived many years. In 1772 he and 
Anne Douglas were named executors of the will of Benjamin Douglas Jr. 

62

The will of George Clarke Smoot was dated July 22, 1779, and proved in 
Charles County on October 20, 1779. He directed that his estate be 
maintained and administered by his brother William Barton Smoot and 
his sister Elizabeth Smoot for the support and education of his children 
until his son Philip Barton reached the age of 16 years. He willed his son, 
Alexander, all land in Charles County, and the residue of the estate to his 
children. The instrument was witnessed by James Cotterell, Abel 
Wakefield, and Mary Wakefield. 
The inventory of his personal effects was filed on March 14, 1780, with 
Susannah Smoot and John Attaway Clarke as the kinsmen. 
The executors of George Smoot paid taxes on 30 acres of "Baker's 
Addition" lying in William and Mary Parish in 1783. 


CAPTAIN WILLIAM BARTON SMOOT6
(17-- - 1793)
William Barton Smoot, son of Barton and Susannah (Clarke) Smoot, was 
born in Charles County. Sometime after 1773 he married Elizabeth, the 
widow of John Reed Jenifer, of St. Mary's County. 


Children of William Barton and Elizabeth Smoot
1. Elizabeth Smoot. 
2. Mary Smoot. 
William Barton Smoot was commissioned a captain of the Lower 
Battalion of Militia in St. Mary's on August 26, 1777. He was in service 
as late as 1781.1 
The census of 1790 shows William Barton Smoot as head of a family in 
St. Mary's County with four females, and 16 slaves. 
The land record of St. Mary's County states that Elizabeth Jenifer, 
widow, patented "Paw Paw Fields" of 208 acres, but at the issuance of 
the certificate on March 7, 1792, she was Elizabeth Smoot "having 
intermarried with William Barton Smoot". 
The will of William Barton Smoot was dated March 16, 1793, and 
proved in St. Mary's County on June 18, 1793, by Thomas Cook, Jane 
Cook, and Susannah Mackall Watts. He devised the dwelling-plantation 
"Folly" together with an adjoining plantation called "Joy Hills", 
purchased from the commissioners as confiscated British property, to his 
daughters Betty and Mary. He also mentioned his tract "Marsh Pasture", 
described as back land. His sister, Elizabeth Philpot, was named as 
executrix and guardian of his two minor daughters. 


1Archives, vol. 16, p. 346; vol. 45, p. 246; vol 48, p. 128. 


63


BARTON SMOOT6
(1740 - 18--)
Barton Smoot, son of Isaac and Elizabeth Smoot, was born November 1, 
1740, in Charles County. He lived at one time in Dorchester County, for 
in 1799 as a resident of that place he deeded negroes to his children 
Elizabeth and Edward. Elizabeth, who married ---- Radcliffe and who 
was later a resident of Prince William County, Virginia, was, however, 
the only surviving heir in the settlement of the estate of Lieutenant 
William Smoot in 1827. 


ISAAC SMOOT6
(17-- - 1821)
Isaac Smoot, son of Isaac and Elizabeth Smoot, was born December 2, 
1745, in Charles County, Maryland. On October 28, 1779, he married 
Mary Lock, but no issues survived. At the Charles County tax list of 
1783, he was seized of 200 acres of "Green's Rest", 50 acres of 
"Boarman's Friend's Offer", and 41 3/4 acres of "Toombit". He, however, 
became a resident of St. Mary's County, where in 1792 he was elected a 
vestryman of All Faith's Parish. On July 3, 1799, he sold to James Keech 
a portion of "Hulsome", portion of "Truman's Hunting Quarter", portion 
of "Truman's Lodge", and portions of the following tracts--"John 
Edward's Discovery", "Price Lot", and "Plains of Jericho"--all lying in St. 
Mary's County. 
In 1800 he had in his household 2 males between the ages of 10 and 16, 3 
males between 16 and 26, 1 female between 16 and 26, and 1 female 
between 26 and 45. In 1810 he was the head of a family with a female 
over 45 years. 
On February 17, 1797, he patented "Little Yielding" of 19 1/2 acres, 
lying in St. Mary's County, which he conveyed within a few weeks to 
Jesse Lock. 
He died intestate in St. Mary's County. An inventory of his personal 
effects was taken on February 8, 1821, appraised at $143.25, with 
Richard D. Edwards as the administrator. The public sale of his goods 
brought $188.28 3/4. No Smoots were among the purchasers. The 
accounts showed $37.50 due as rent to Mary Chappelear. The fact that 
his personal estate at his death was negligible, and that he was a tenant 
leads one to the belief that he sustained financial reverses and for that 
reason he was forced to dispose of his realty in 1799. 

64


THOMAS SMOOT6
(1742 - 1783)
Thomas Smoot, son of William and Eleanor Smoot, was born December 
1742, in Charles County, Maryland. During the early days of the 
Revolutionary War he served as a private in the company of Captain 
Yates of the militia of Charles County--and as there is also a record of a 
Sergeant Thomas Smoot, perhaps he also served in that capacity.2 After 
his service in the Maryland militia, he settled in Prince William County, 
Virginia. 
After 1763 he married Elizabeth ----. The fact that he gave the family 
name of Maddox to three of his sons would indicate that either his 
mother or wife were of that family--probably his mother, for it is 
traditional that his wife was of Middleton lineage. 


Children of Thomas and Elizabeth Smoot
1. Notley Smoot. q.v. 
2. William Mattox Smoot. q.v. 
3. Thomas St. Henley Smoot. 
4. Mary Smoot married Samuel Ballenger, Oct. 20, 1779, by Rev. 
Joseph Threlkeld, Mont. Co., Md. 
5. Henry M. Smoot married twice. q.v. 
6. George Mattox Smoot. q.v. 
7. James Mattox Smoot. q.v. 
8. Posthumous child. 
His will was dated May 20, 1783, and probated on July 7, 1783, by 
James Ewell, Gent., George Samkin, Prestley Petty, James Brown, and 
William Petty. He devised personalty to his sons Notley, William 
Mattox, and Thomas St. Henley Smoot. To his daughter Mary Ballenger, 
he left five shillings inasmuch as she had already received a sufficient 
portion of his estate. The residue was bequeathed to his wife Elizabeth 
during life, then to be divided among his sons--Henry, George Mattox, 
James Mattox, and an unborn child. 


WILLIAM SMOOT6
(1751 - 1821)
William Smoot, son of William and Eleanor Smoot, was born August 
1751, in Charles County, Maryland. During the Revolutionary War he 
served as a private in Captain Hezekiah Garner's Company of 
2Unpub., Md. Records, Maryland Historical Society. 


65

Charles County Militia.3 At the census of 1790, he was the head of a 
family in his native county with a male in his household over 16 years of 
age, besides himself; 2 males under 16 years; 4 females; and 4 slaves. He 
fails to appear as the head of a family in Charles County in 1800, and 
inasmuch as from circumstances one does not identify any Smoots as 
heads of families in that county who could be his children, it is therefore 
assumed that he settled elsewhere. 
A Smoot descendant stated that her ancestor left Maryland, settled in 
Culpeper County, Virginia, and then moved to Prince William County, 
where he died. From this tradition we identify him as the William Smoot 
who was seated on Little Battle Run in St. Mark's Parish, Culpeper 
County, shortly after 1790. If such be the case, he buried his first wife 
and married secondly Susannah Haydon or Hadden, of Maryland lineage. 
The marriage was performed, according to the records of St. Mark's, on 
December 4, 1795. Although she stated in 1850 that she was born in 
Virginia, circumstances would seem to indicate that she was a native of 
St. Mary's County, Maryland. In 1805 William Smoot and Susannah his 
wife "as heirs of James Haydon, of Richard, late of Chaptico Hundred, 
St. Mary's County, deceased" conveyed property to Peregrine Haydon. 
A complete list of the children of William Smoot has not been 
determined, and the following are only inferred: 
1. Matthew Smoot. 
2. Thomas Jefferson Smoot. q.v. 
3. William Haydon Smoot. q.v. 
4. Peregrine Smoot. 
5. Henrietta Smoot. 
On April 3, 1819, William Smoot purchased from George Greene and 
Agatha his wife, of Stafford County, Virginia, 300 acres of land lying in 
Culpeper County. On January 5, 1820, William Smoot and Susannah his 
wife conveyed to Daniel Ward of Culpeper County for $1,800 land in 
Culpeper County "whereon William Smoot lately dwelt", lying on the 
east side of Little Battle Run. 
On January 22, 1821, John Blackwell, Stanton Slaughter, and George B. 
Pickell, executors of Martin Pickell, also William Payne, Charles R. 
Scott, Thornton Buckner, and Edward Digges Jr., "commissioners" 
conveyed to William Smoot "whereby a decree of the County Court of 
Fauquier in a suit pending between the devisees and executors of Martin 
Pickell" land in Culpeper County on Little Battle Run consisting of 150 
3Unpublished Maryland Records, vol. 2, p. 311, D. A. R. Library. 

66

acres which had been conveyed to Martin Pickell and John Blackwell by 
James Greene. 
Before this date, however, William Smoot had moved to Prince William 
County, Virginia, and settled at Occoquan, where some of his 
descendants are still living. There he died intestate during the latter part 
of 1821. 
The inventory of his personal estate was taken on November 1, 1821, and 
appraised at $193.87 1/2, showing no slaves but mostly household 
furniture. At the public sale, most of the personalty was purchased by 
Susan Smoot, Thomas J. Smoot, and Matthew Smoot. Daniel Ward, the 
administrator (no doubt the greatest creditor) rendered an account on 
November 5, 1823, showing $1.00 paid to Pereg Smoot, $78.39 received 
from Mrs. Susan Smoot, and $5.45 from Thomas J. Smoot. 
In 1830 Susan Smoot was the head of a family in Prince William County, 
with six males born between 1800 and 1810, and one born between 1810 
and 1815. In 1850 she was living with Henrietta Smoot, born 1813 in 
Virginia, and adjoining her residence were Jefferson Smoot and William 
H. Smoot. 
Matthew "H". Smoot, the believed son of William, served as a private in 
Captain Joseph Smith's Company, 36th Regt. of Virginia, commanded by 
Colonel Renno. He was in service during 1814, the first few days having 
been spent in the company of Captain James Hayes. 


WILLIAM BARTON SMOOT6
(17-- - 1816)
William Barton Smoot, son of Thomas and Eleanor Smoot, was born in 
Charles County. During the Revolutionary War he served first as a 
private and later as a sergeant in the company of Captain Walter Hanson, 
12th Battalion of Charles County Militia.4 He married Margaret, 
daughter of Walter Dodson, and maintained his seat in Port Tobacco 
Parish. From the fact that he named only two children in his will but 
devised the personal estate to "all his children" would seem to indicate 
that he had more than a son and daughter. 


Children of William and Margaret (Dodson) Smoot
1. John Weems Smoot married Elizabeth Hawkins. q.v. 
2. Amelia Tabbs Smoot. 
On June 24, 1784, William Barton Smoot of Thomas conveyed to John 
Howard Marshall the tract known as "Parendure's Lot". Margaret 
4Unpublished Maryland Records, vol. 2, pp. 296, 300. 

67

Smoot, his wife, relinquished her third. On June 22, 1796, William 
Barton Smoot and Margaret his wife, together with other heirs of Walter 
Dodson, conveyed to Luke White Barber, of St. Mary's County, the tract 
"Sarum". 
The will of William Barton Smoot was dated October 6, 1816, and 
proved in Charles County on January 8, 1817, by John W. Hawkins, 
Sarah Martin, Caleb Hawkins, and Susannah McC. Watts. He bequeathed 
his wife, Margaret, the use and occupancy of his entire real estate during 
life, then to his son John Weems Smoot. His wife also received the entire 
personal estate during life then to all the children. His daughter Amelia 
Tabbs Smoot was granted a room in his house during her single life. His 
brother, Thomas, was to be supported with board and clothing by his 
widow as heretofore accustomed, but in the event that Thomas should 
survive the widow, then Thomas was committed to the care of the 
testator's son John. 


WILLOUGHBY SMOOT7
Willoughby Smoot, believed to be the same as Wilkes Smoot, was the 
son of George Clarke Smoot. During the Revolution he aided the cause 
by the manufacture of salt for the Army.5 He settled in St. Mary's 
County, where he was the head of a family in 1790, with a male over 16 
years of age, a female, and one slave. As he was not listed in the census 
of 1800, it is believed that Mary Smoot, who was the head of a household 
at that time with a son less than 10 years of age, was his widow. At that 
time Mary Smoot was between the ages of 26 and 45 years. 


JOHN ALEXANDER SMOOT7
(17-- - 1827)
John Alexander Smoot, son of George Clarke and Sarah Smoot, was born 
before 1765 in Charles County. He served during the revolutionary 
conflict as a private in Captain Benjamin Cawood's company of Charles 
County Militia.6 
On November 4, 1784, in St. Andrew's Parish, St. Mary's County, he was 
married to Abigail Hunter Tabbs. In 1789 his wife shared in the 
distribution of the estate of her spinster sister, Mary Tabbs, and in 1803 
in that of her bachelor brother, Thomas Tabbs, late of St. Mary's County. 


5Archives, vol. 48, p. 195. 


6Unpublished Maryland Records, vol. 2, p. 251. 


68


Children of Alexander and Abigail (Tabbs) Smoot
1. Sarah A. Smoot married Jan. 24, 1811, James Gatewood. 
2. Alexander Smoot. 
3. Charles Smoot married June 24, 1821, Rebecca Logan, and Apr. 16, 
1837, Frances Famsley. 
4. George Clarke Smoot. 
5. Elizabeth Smoot married Aug. 24, 1817, Henry Shivley. 
6. Abigail Hunter Tabbs Smoot married Mar. 24, 1822, Joseph M. 
Speed, Jeff. Co., Ky. 
7. Philip Barton Smoot married Oct. 2, 1832, Mary King, Jeff. 
Co., Ky. 
On April 27, 1795, Alexander Smoot, of Charles County, deeded 
property to Barton Tabbs, of St. Mary's County, at which time his wife 
Abigail waived her dower. Some time between this date and February 12, 
1798, when he was appointed magistrate of Jefferson County, Kentucky, 
he had left his native State and settled in the West. The first preserved 
census of Kentucky (1810) shows him the head of a family in Jefferson 
County with 12 slaves. 
The will of Alexander Smoot was dated September 20, 1820, and proved 
in Jefferson County, Kentucky, on June 8, 1827, by Hugh Logan, 
Vandorem Logan, and Sete Logan. He bequeathed equally to his sons 
Alexander and Charles the dwelling-plantation. Charles was to have the 
portion on the Big Road leading to Salt River including the house and 
orchard, was to settle all debts, and to raise and educate his brother 
Philip, and his sister Abigail. George was devised $1.00. Personalty was 
left to his three daughters, Sarah the wife of James Gatewood, Elizabeth 
Shiveley, and Abigail Hunter Tabbs Smoot. In the event that Philip died 
a minor, his share was to be divided between Charles and Abigail. Philip 
was to be bound-out to learn a trade as house-joiner, brick layer, or 
plasterer. His son Charles was named as executor. 


GEORGE CLARKE SMOOT7
George Clarke Smoot, son of George Clarke and Sarah Smoot, was born 
in Charles County, Maryland. He settled in Washington County, 
Maryland, where he was one time connected with the county court house. 
His wife is buried in the Episcopal graveyard at Hagerstown. Her tomb 
reads: "Mrs. Matilda Smoot wife of George C. Smoot departed this life 
March 7, 1844 aged 68". 

69


PHILIP BARTON SMOOT7
Philip Barton Smoot, son of George Clarke Smoot, moved to Bourbon 
County, Kentucky. As a resident of that county he deeded to Lawrence 
Posey, of Charles County, "Walker's Runn", "Miraculous Pitcher", 
"Outlet", "Courts' Palace", "Brother", and "Misboth", all of which had 
been devised to Elizabeth Philpott, late of Charles County. His wife 
Maria Smoot waived her dower rights. 


NOTLEY SMOOT7
Notley Smoot, son of Thomas and Elizabeth Smoot, was born sometime 
before 1765, perhaps in Charles County, Maryland. His youth, however, 
was spent in Prince William County, Virginia, where his father died in 
1783. After this date Notley left the scenes of his youth and settled in 
Nelson County, Virginia, where he is found as the head of a family at the 
1810 census. 
The name of his wife is undetermined, but she was likewise born before 
1765. The names of all children have not been established; from the 
census records one can infer that he had at least five sons and one 
daughter. 


Children of Notley Smoot
1. Notley Smoot. q.v. 
2. Reubin Smoot married P. Martin. q.v. 
3. Thomas Smoot. q.v. 
4. John Smoot. q.v. 


WILLIAM MATTOX SMOOT7
William Mattox Smoot, son of Thomas and Elizabeth Smoot, was born, 
according to the census records, between 1760-1770, in Charles County, 
Maryland. He married (name of wife unknown) and was living in Prince 
William County, Virginia, as late as 1820. In that year he had in his 
household his wife, born before 1775, one boy and two girls born 
between 1804-1810, and a boy and girl born between 1810-1820. The 
following list of children is therefore incomplete. 


Children of William Mattox Smoot
1. William Smoot married Nancy Estes. q.v. 
2. Lewis Henry Smoot married Anne Mason. q.v. 
3. Benjamin Franklin Smoot. 
After 1820 William Smoot settled in that portion of Culpeper County, 
Virginia, which in 1836 was organized into Rappahannock County. 


70

From the census of 1830, it can be concluded that he was a widower with 
at least one single daughter and three sons at home--the youngest son 
having been born about 1820. During his declining years he sustained 
financial reverses and on September 23, 1835, conveyed land for the 
settlement of debts. His son Lewis H. Smoot was also involved in the 
transaction. William Smoot died sometime before 1840. 


HENRY SMOOT7
(1775 - 1835)
Henry Smoot, son of Thomas and Elizabeth Smoot, was born probably in 
the year 1775, or according to subsequent census records sometime 
between 1775-1794. It is traditional that the mother of Henry was of 
Middleton lineage--a family which was established early in Charles 
County, Maryland, and intermarried chiefly with the Roman Catholic 
families. It is noted that a son was named Middleton and that Henry 
sometime signed "M" as the initial of his middle name. Furthermore, the 
name is carried in several branches of Smoots in Prince William and 
Rappahannock counties of Virginia.7 
On April 28, 1794, in Fauquier County, Henry Smoot secured license to 
marry Anne Walter who was the daughter of William and Anne Walter, 
one-time resident of St. Mary's County, Maryland. William Walter 
offered bond for the prospective groom. The father of Anne Walter was 
domiciled in the latter county at the first census and died there a few 
years later. His estate was distributed in 1804 by his administratrix, Anne 
Walter, to his heirs, among whom was Anne Smoot. 


Children of Henry and Anne (Walter) Smoot
1. Richard Smoot, d.s.p. 
2. William Smoot married Phoebe ----. q.v. 
3. Lucy Smoot, spinster. 
4. Middleton Smoot married twice. q.v. 
5. Walter Bragg Smoot married twice. q.v. 
Henry Smoot in 1810, the first available census for Virginia, was living 
in Loudoun County, Virginia, with a young family. Soon afterwards he 
returned to his native county, inasmuch as between July 20 and 26, 1813, 
he served as private in Captain Joseph R. Gilbert's Company, 
7The daughter of Middleton Smoot stated in 1915 that her father knew 
very 
little about his people. Middleton, however, stated in 1880 that his father 
was born 
in Virginia as well as his mother. He also stated that his mother was 
Anne 
Waters, while records show her to be Anne Walter. 


71

under the command of Colonel Renno, of the 36th Virginia Regiment, 
which was organized in Prince William County. At this time he was 
stationed at Dumfries. In January 1814, he was a sergeant in Captain 
Gilbert's company attached to the 6th Virginia Regiment commanded by 
Colonel Coleman. On April 13, 1814, he was listed as "sick" at Norfolk, 
217 miles from the place of rendezvous. From November 5 to December 
17, 1814, he served as private in a company commanded by Lieutenant 
Thomas Sorrille, of the 1st Virginia Regiment, and was discharged at 
Fredericksburg "25 miles from home." From August 1 to 7, 1814, he was 
sergeant of a Light Infantry company commanded by Captain James 
Hayes, formed in Prince William County. On September 4, 1814, he 
enlisted in Captain Robert Mallory's company of the 1st Virginia 
Regiment, commanded by Colonel Crutchfield. He was discharged 
November 5, 1814. 
On November 6, 1819, Henry M. Smoot purchased 166 acres of land in 
Prince William County, Virginia, from the Crosley heirs, that is, 
Zephenia Crook and Margaret his wife, John Nelson and Margaret his 
wife, Thomas Nelson and Elizabeth his wife, John Smith and Verlinda 
his wife, Olley Crosley, Sylvanus Crosley and Polly his wife, and 
William Crosley and Grandison Crosley, infant wards of Olley Crosley. 
In 1820 he was the head of a family in Prince William County, with 10 
slaves on his plantation. 
His first wife died perhaps after 1820, and he married secondly Phoebe 
---- who joined him on July 27, 1833, in a deed when he mortgaged his 
plantation in Prince William County. At this time he was not a resident of 
that county nor was he listed as the head of a family there in 1830. 
In his declining years Henry Smoot joined his sons in Lewis County, 
Missouri, and there he died at the home of his son Middleton in 1835. He 
was interred in the cemetery at Wyaconda. His will, proved at 
Monticello, bequeathed his entire estate to his three surviving sons--
William, Middleton, and Walter Bragg. 


GEORGE MATTOX SMOOT7
George Mattox Smoot, son of Thomas and Elizabeth Smoot, was born 
sometime between the years 1765-1794. He appears as the head of a 
family in Prince William County, Virginia, in 1810, with a wife, six 
young girls, presumably daughters, and four slaves. During the War of 
1812 he served as a private in the company of Captain George W. 
Jackson, 34th Virginia Regiment, commanded by Colonel Renno. He 

72

was discharged November 24, 1814, at Camp Ellicott's Mills, "72 miles 
from home". He was not the head of a family at subsequent censuses of 
Prince William County. 


JAMES MATTOX SMOOT7
James Mattox Smoot, son of William and Elizabeth Smoot, was born 
before 1775. He and his wife were living in Prince William County, 
Virginia, at the 1820 census with a girl born between 1804-1810. He was 
not the head of a family there in 1830. 


THOMAS JEFFERSON SMOOT7
(1800 - 18--)
Thomas Jefferson Smoot, believed son of William and Susan (Haydon) 
Smoot, was born 1800 in Virginia. He married Frances Amelia ----, 
born 1811, same State. On January 7, 1842, he purchased from James 
Coulter a lot in Occoquan. On December 24, 1850, he and his wife 
deeded to "our relations" Susan Smoot, Henrietta Smoot, Alsinda Smoot, 
and Thomas Smoot for love and natural affections a house and lot in 
Occoquan that had been conveyed to Thomas J. Smoot by Joseph Janney 
and John H. Janney. On May 21, 1856, he conveyed to his wife Frances 
Amelia Smoot a lot in Occoquan. 
At the census of 1850 he was listed as a carpenter, with realty valued at 
$300, and the following children were at home: William, born 1843; Jane 
C., born 1848; and Henrietta, born 1850. 


WILLIAM H. SMOOT7
(1803 - 18--)
William H. Smoot, son of William and Susannah (Haydon) Smoot, was 
born 1803 in Culpeper County, Virginia. He married Nancy ----, born 
1811 in Virginia. The following children composed his household in 
1850, when he, occupied as a cooper, was the head of a family in Prince 
William County, Virginia: Laura V. Smoot, born 1838, married John W. 
Stemm, according to license issued in the District of Columbia May 12, 
1856; Margaret Smoot, born 1844; Middleton Smoot, born 1848; and 
Maria Smoot, born 1850. 
A deed of December 10, 1836, recorded in Fauquier County, shows 
Presley Williams of the first part, William H. Smoot and Elijah Smith of 
the second part, and Thomas J. Smoot of the third part. 

73


LIEUTENANT JOHN WEEMS SMOOT7
(1796 - 1861)
John Weems Smoot, son of William Barton and Margaret (Dodson) 
Smoot, was born 1796 in Charles County, Maryland. At the beginning of 
the War of 1812, he held the rank of ensign in the United States Army, 
but on January 2, 1812, he was advanced to second lieutenant, and on 
February 14, 1814, to first lieutenant. His services were with the Fifth 
United States Regiment except towards the latter part of the war when he 
served with the Fourth Regiment. His resignation from the service was 
accepted on June 15, 1815. 
John Weems Smoot married Elizabeth Eleanor Anne, born about 1809, 
the daughter of Thomas Hawkins. 


Children of John and Elizabeth (Hawkins) Smoot
1. Andrew Jackson Smoot, born July 7, 1828, died 1906, married 1855 
Nannie Wood Crain. Issues: Gerard Wood Crain; Hungerford; 
Andrew Jackson; and Amelia Tabbs. 
2. William Barton Smoot, born 1836, d.s.p. 
3. Margaret Amelia Smoot. 
At the census of 1840 John Weems Smoot was one of the largest slave 
owners in Charles County, being the master of 62 negroes. In 1860 his 
realty was appraised at $14,000 and his personal estate at $40,000. He 
died during 1861; his widow survived until 1868. 


NOTLEY SMOOT8
(1795 - 18--)
Notley Smoot, son of Notley, was born in the year 1795 in Virginia. On 
September 2, 1814, he enlisted as a private in the company of Captain 
Robert L. Coleman, 8th Virginia Regiment of Light Infantry, 
commanded by Colonel Wall and organized in Rockbridge County. He 
was present at muster on November 7, 1814, at Camp Carter near 
Richmond, and was discharged there on January 28, 1815. He was 
granted rations to his home "140 miles distant". On December 28, 1829, 
he was granted license in Nelson County, to marry Deborah (Tyler or 
Lyon), with Robert Watkins as his bondsman. In 1850 Notley Smoot was 
the head of a household in Nelson County, with Nancy, born 1831, and 
John, born 1833, both in Virginia, as the only members of his immediate 
family at home. 

74


REUBEN SMOOT8
Reuben Smoot, son of Notley, was born perhaps in Nelson County, 
Virginia. During the War of 1812 he served as a private in Captain 
Samuel B. Jeters' Company of the 7th Regiment of Artillery, Colonel 
Gray's Regiment. He substituted for Daniel L. Burford and was 
discharged January 7, 1815, by furnishing George Ellis to complete his 
enlistment. He was stationed at one time at Camp Carter. In Nelson 
County, Virginia, he secured license to marry P. Martin, with Henry 
Martin as his security. 


THOMAS SMOOT8
(1795 - 18--)
Thomas Smoot, son of Notley, was born about 1795 presumably in 
Nelson County, Virginia. On September 2, 1814, in Rockbridge County, 
he with his brothers enlisted in the company of Captain Robert L. 
Coleman of the Eighth Virginia Regiment of Light Infantry commanded 
by Colonel Wall. He was present at Camp Carter near Richmond at 
muster on November 7, 1814, and performed during his service 
considerable amount of guard duty at the penitentiary of that post. He 
was discharged there on January 28, 1815, and was granted traveling 
rations to his home "140 miles distant". 
About 1818 Thomas married and settled in Amherst County, but the 
identity of his wife has not been established. From the census schedules 
there were probably a number of children, but the names of only two--
William Henry (q.v.) and J. F. Smoot--are known. 
After 1830 Thomas Smoot moved from Amherst County, and it is 
probable that he lived again for a period in Nelson County. The census of 
1860 shows him to be residing with J. F. Smoot, assumed as his son, near 
Davis Mills, Bedford County, Virginia. He was listed as a merchant, also 
J. F. Smoot who was aged 33 years. The latter's wife was C. A. Smoot, 
aged 29, and born in Virginia. Their children were J. F. (boy) aged 5; P. 
E. (girl) aged 3; and L. (girl) aged 1. 


JOHN SMOOT8
(1785 - 18--)
John Smoot, son of Notley, was born in the year 1785 in Virginia. His 
wife was Sally ----, born 1797 in Virginia. By occupation he was a 
shoemaker and resided in Amherst County. The 1850 census shows him 
with his wife and the following children all born in Virginia: Thomas, 
aged 21; John, aged 16; Robert, aged 14; and Benjamin, aged 12. 


75


WILLIAM SMOOT8
William Smoot, son of William Mattox, was born in Prince William 
County, Virginia, about 1804. He settled in Culpeper (now 
Rappahannock) County with his parent, and there during August 1827, 
he secured license to marry Nancy Estice (Estes). The following children 
are established by the 1850 census--John Edward Smoot, born 1829, 
married March 24, 1853, Martha Jane Riley; Elizabeth Smoot, born 
1836; and James M. Smoot, born 1838. In his household was also Sarah 
Estice, born 1796, in Virginia. 


LEWIS HENRY SMOOT8
(1810 - 18--)
Lewis Henry Smoot, son of William Mattox, was born about 1810 in 
Prince William County, Virginia. He settled in Rappahannock County, 
and about 1834 married Anne Mason, born about 1810, in Virginia. 


Children of Lewis Henry and Anne (Mason) Smoot
1. Benjamin F. Smoot married Phoebe Anne Wright. q.v. 
2. Sarah C. Smoot, born 1837, spinster. 
3. Mary Smoot, born 1839, spinster. 
4. Lewis Henry Smoot, C. S. A., d.s.p., married Harriet Jones. 
5. Cesla Mason Smoot, born 1845, married Nannie Boughton, of 
Essex Co., and Susannah Lewis, of K. & Q. Co. Issues: (first) 
George Mason; (second) Philip Lewis; and William. 
6. James Middleton Smoot, born 1849, married Anne Smoot. 
7. Anne Virginia Smoot, born 1852, married twice, d.s.p. 
Lewis Henry Smoot lived during the early part of his life in 
Rappahannock County, Virginia, where all of his children were born. 
The census of 1850 lists him as a millwright. On May 23, 1840, he was 
the third party in a land transaction between his brother, William Smoot, 
and John McFarling. The former had previously transferred the land in 
1835 to John McFarling, while the latter conveyed the consideration to 
Lewis H. Smoot. About 1855 he moved to Caroline County, near Sparta, 
where he established a milling industry, which is now commemorated by 
the town of Smoots. He probably died before 1870, inasmuch as he was 
not listed as the head of a family at that census in Caroline County. 
It is traditional that a cousin of Lewis Henry Smoot settled in Caroline 
County and married a daughter of William I. Murray. In 1870 one finds 
Ella Smoot, aged 35, living at the home of the latter, a 

76

wealthy farmer of Caroline County, with the following children--Millie 
Smoot, aged 14; John Smoot, aged 12; and Charles Smoot, aged 10--all 
born in Virginia. 


WILLIAM SMOOT8
(1798 - 18--)
William Smoot, son of Henry and Anne (Walter) Smoot, was born 1798 
in the State of Virginia. He married Phoebe ----, also a native of 
Virginia and born the same year. They migrated westward and ultimately 
settled in Lewis County, Missouri, where William was the head of a 
household in 1850. One child has been proved--Balsora (Ballie) Smoot, 
born 1841 in Missouri, married Augustus Ranson. In 1870 William 
Smoot was the head of his household, with realty appraised at $4,000 and 
personalty at $1,000. His daughter, son-in-law, and granddaughter Addie 
Ranson aged 3, were also members of his immediate family. 


MIDDLETON SMOOT8
(1795 - 18--)
Middleton Smoot, son of Henry and Anne (Walter) Smoot, was born 
about 1795 in the State of Virginia. He married first Hannah Northcraft, a 
native of Virginia, and settled in Shenandoah County, where he was 
listed as the head of a family in 1830, with a son and daughter both born 
between 1825 and 1830. Shortly afterwards, he settled in Lewis County, 
Missouri, with his brothers, and established his seat on the Mississippi at 
a place which became known as Smoot's Landing. His first wife died 
early at well as her two only children. About 1856 or so he married Alice 
or Althea Rebecca Stephens, born 1838 in Alabama or Georgia. (The 
1860 census states Alabama, the 1880 Georgia). In 1859 Rosalie, their 
only child, was born. In young womanhood she married Mr. 
McCullough. In 1870 Middleton Smoot was a retired farmer of Lewis 
County, with realty appraised at $20,000 and personalty at $2,500. In his 
household was also Demarius Smoot, born 1849, in Missouri. 


WALTER BRAGG SMOOT8
(1810 - 1867)
Walter Bragg Smoot, son of Henry and Anne (Walter) Smoot, was born 
in the year 1810 in Loudoun County, Virginia. About 1837 he married 
Letitia Wood, of Culpeper County, sister to Montague and Jack Wood. 


77


Children of Walter and Letitia (Wood) Smoot
1. John Henry Smoot, born 1839, 1st Lieut., Co. D., 6 Tex. Cav., 
C. S. A.; killed in action. 
2. William Homer Smoot, born 1843, C. S. A., married Susan 
Wilkins. 
3. Philo Smoot married Edmund Burke. 
Walter Bragg Smoot migrated to Missouri, and after 1850 he settled in 
Howard County of that State. On October 1, 1855, he granted the power 
of attorney to his son John H. Smoot, then in Culpeper County, 
authorizing him to dispose of any property in that county to which he 
might be entitled. The census of 1860 shows him to be the head of a 
family in Howard County, with his sons, John H. and William H. 
On August 15, 1860, in Howard County, Walter Bragg Smoot married 
Elizabeth, born May 21, 1834, in Missouri, the daughter of Jonathan and 
Cynthia (Gross) Bozarth, both natives of Kentucky. Almost immediately 
after their marriage they migrated to Collin County, Texas, in the 
covered wagon of that day, carrying their slaves with them. 


Children of Walter Bragg and Elizabeth (Bozarth) Smoot
1. Walter Edmund Smoot, born Aug. 18, 1864, Howard Co., Mo. 
2. John Bragg Smoot married Mary Eleanor Tyler. q.v. 
Walter Bragg died in Collin County, Texas, on July 4, 1867. His widow 
died at her residence at Plano, Texas, on January 15, 1914. 


WILLIAM HENRY SMOOT, C. S. A.9
(1826 - 1906)
William Henry Smoot, son of Thomas, was born in Amherst County, 
Virginia, about the year 1826, according to the 1860 census. About 1853 
he married Minnie (Mary F.) Sutphin, a native of Virginia, born about 
1836. 


Children of William Henry and Minnie (Sutphin) Smoot
1. Arthur Henry Smoot married Ida Ryan. q.v. 
2. James Thomas Smoot, born 1855, migrated west. 
3. Mary Willie Smoot, born about 1857, died 1935, married Austin W. 
Martenstein. 
4. Willard Smoot married Irene Massie. q.v. 
5. Edgar Kenneth Smoot married Alice Irene MacFarlane. q.v. 
6. Otis Sutphin Smoot, born Nov. 5, 1867, married Ethel Roberts. 
Issues: Jesse, born Jan. 25, 1904. 
7. Minnie Kate Smoot, born 1871, died 1887. 
8. Caroline Smoot, died 1919, married Archibald Cary Lewis. Issues: 
Mildred, born 1884, at Henderson, N. C.; and Aileen, born 1886, 
at Henderson. 

78


In 1860 William Henry Smoot was the proprietor of a mercantile 
establishment at Big Island, Bedford County, Virginia, with realty 
assessed at $5,000 and personalty property at $28,955. Besides his 
immediate family, he had in his home two clerks--Charles M. Perry, aged 
21, and John W. Reid, aged 22--and Mollie Woody, aged 12, born in 
Virginia. 
He was probably the William H. Smoot who on February 24, 1862, 
enlisted at Liberty, Bedford County, as a private in Captain William V. 
Jordan's Company of Heavy Artillery, 91st Regiment of Virginia Militia, 
organized by Major John B. Crenshaw. This company subsequently 
became Company G, 34th Virginia Regiment. It is known, however, that 
he at one time served as a commissary agent for the Confederate 
Government. After the war he lived at Gordonsville, Virginia, Durham, 
North Carolina, and Richmond, where he died on November 23, 1906. 


BENJAMIN FRANKLIN SMOOT, C. S. A.9
(1836 - 18--)
Benjamin Franklin Smoot, son of Lewis Henry and Anne (Mason) 
Smoot, was born 1836, in Rappahannock County, Virginia. He 
accompanied his parents to Caroline County, where on January 18, 1857, 
he married Phoebe Anne, born 1838, daughter of William Wright, of that 
county. During the War Between the States Benjamin Franklin Smoot 
served as a private in Company B, of the 9th Virginia Infantry. 


Children of Benjamin and Phoebe (Wright) Smoot
1. Lucy Florence Smoot, born 1858, married ---- Beazlie. 
2. Anne Brown Smoot, born 1861. 
3. Otho Perry Smoot married twice. q.v. 
4. Sarah Dean Smoot, born 1866. 
5. Margaret Louise Smoot, born 1868. 
6. Benjamin Franklin Smoot. 
7. Ernest Granville Smoot. 
8. Phoebe Alice Smoot. 


DR. JOHN BRAGG SMOOT9
(1868 - 1927)
John Bragg Smoot, son of Walter Bragg and Elizabeth (Bozarth) Smoot, 
was born February 20, 1868, in Collin County, Texas. On December 9, 
1891, at St. Louis, Missouri, he married Mary Eleanor, born April 28, 
1870, the daughter of William Scott and Eleanor (Lanham) 


79

Tyler. The ceremony was performed at the residence of the bride's 
mother, then Mrs. Joseph A. Wherry, at 3734 Cook Avenue, by the Rev. 
Mr. Messick, of the Southern Methodist Church. Dr. Smoot lived part of 
his married life in Dallas, Texas, where he died February 2, 1927. He 
was interred at Plano, his boyhood home. 
Only one child, a son, was born to Dr. Smoot and his wife--John Bragg 
Smoot, born January 16, 1896, at Dallas. During the World War he 
served in the Air Corps of his country. In 1923 he was married to Lavon, 
daughter of Reuben Searle and Martha Jane (Bennett) Lanyon. Two 
daughters have been born--Martha Eleanor, born August 19, 1924, and 
Lavon Lanyon, born October 26, 1926. His residence is at Joplin, 
Missouri. 


ARTHUR HENRY SMOOT10
(1854 - 1898)
Arthur Henry Smoot, son of William Henry and Minnie (Sutphin) Smoot, 
was born 1854 at Big Island, Bedford County, Virginia. He married Ida 
Ryan, of Lynchburg, born 1863. She died during 1889; he survived until 
1898. 


Children of Arthur Henry and Ida (Ryan) Smoot
1. Arthur Henry Smoot, born 1884, at Lynchburg, served with the 
British Forces during the World War, married an English girl, 
and returned to America. 
2. Claude Smoot, born 1886, died 1887. 
3. Ida Smoot, born 1888 at Lynchburg, married William Lawrence 
Grimes, born 1874, Kenonsville, N. C., and lives (1936) at 
Spartanburg, S. C. Issues: Mary Louise, born 1912. 


WILLARD SMOOT10
Willard Smoot, son of William Henry and Minnie (Sutphin) Smoot, was 
born September 13, 1859, at Big Island, Bedford County, Virginia. On 
April 16, 1904, he married Irene, born October 6, 1881, in Nelson 
County, Virginia, the daughter of Hope William Massie, one time 
Second Lieutenant of Reeves' Battery, Hood's Brigade, of the 
Confederate Army, and his wife Laura Williams Effinger, of Rockbridge 
County. She, Irene Massie, was also the great-granddaughter of Thomas 
Massie, first a Captain of the Sixth Virginia Regiment, later Major of the 
Second Virginia Regiment, Aide-de-camp to General Nelson at 
Yorktown, and an original member of the Society of the Cincinnati in the 
State of Virginia. 

80


Children of Willard and Irene (Massie) Smoot
1. Henry Kenneth Smoot, born Mar. 29, 1905, Staunton, Va., M. A., 
George Washington Univ. 
2. Hope Massie Smoot, born Nov. 30, 1906, Staunton, Va., A. B., 
Harvard Univ. 
3. Charles Effinger Smoot, born Sept. 22, 1908, Staunton, Va., A. B. 
and LL. B., George Washington Univ. 
4. Eugene Foster Smoot, born and died 1910. 


COLONEL EDGAR KENNETH SMOOT10
Edgar Kenneth Smoot, son of William Henry and Minnie (Sutphin) 
Smoot, was born January 31, 1862, at Big Island, Bedford County, 
Virginia. He married Alice Irene, daughter of William and Susan 
(Blount) MacFarlane. In 1881 he was commissioned by the State of 
Texas a colonel of a regiment of United States volunteers, and served 
with distinction in several campaigns. He is an outstanding engineer and 
constructed the ports of Galveston, Texas, and Manzanillo, Mexico. 
Furthermore, he has been a consulting engineer for the improvement and 
enlargement of many other Southern ports and harbors. For sometime he 
has resided in Mexico, D. F., Republic of Mexico. 


Children of Edgar and Alice (MacFarlane) Smoot
1. Harold Kenneth Smoot married twice. q.v. 
2. Earl Whitney Smoot, born Oct. 5, 1892, Dallas, Tex., died May 6, 
1930. 


OTHO PERRY SMOOT10
Otho Perry Smoot, son of Benjamin and Phoebe Anne (Wright) Smoot, 
was born about 1863 in Caroline County, Virginia. He married first 
Sallie Hill Ryan, of Amherst County. 


Children of Otho Perry and Sallie (Ryan) Smoot
1. Anne Pearl Smoot. 
2. William Thompson Smoot. 
Otho Perry Smoot married secondly Lalla Rookh, daughter of John and 
Virginia (Bagby) Pollard, and sister of the Honorable John Garland 
Pollard, one-time Governor of Virginia. 


Children of Otho Perry and Lalla (Pollard) Smoot
3. Otho Perry Smoot, graduate of U. S. Naval Academy, Lieut. 
(1936) U. S. N., married Phyllis Shaw Logan, Issues: Perry 
Raeburn and Roger Pollard. 
4. John Pollard Smoot. 
5. Edward Bagby Smoot. 


81



LIEUT. COMM. HAROLD KENNETH SMOOT, U. S. N.11
Harold Kenneth Smoot, son of Colonel Edgar Kenneth Smoot and Alice 
MacFarlane his wife, was born November 29, 1890, at Dallas, Texas, He 
attended the United States Naval Academy, and during the World War 
held the rank of lieutenant commander in command of the U. S. Torpedo 
Boat Morris and the U. S. S. Nicholson. His first wife was Marian Dana 
who became the mother of his daughter--Florence. His second marriage 
was to Velma Stone, and by this union a son--Earl Harold--was born. 

82


THOMAS SMOOT4
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
Thomas Smoot, son of Thomas and Elizabeth (Barton) Smoot, was born 
in William and Mary Parish, Charles County, in the year 1697, according 
to deposition. In 1724 he, with James Waters, was bondsman for Rebecca 
Tyre, when she administered on the estate of John Glass, likewise, in 
1726 he, with Samuel Love, was bondsman for Anne Kingsland at the 
administration of the estate of William Kingsland. 
Before November 13, 1728, Thomas Smoot married Abigail ---- who 
assigned her dower when he deeded "Smoot's Chance" to his brother 
Charles. At the establishment of Trinity Parish in 1753, the plantation of 
Thomas Smoot lay in the newly created parish, and there the births of his 
younger children are recorded. 


Children of Thomas and Abigail Smoot
1. Samuel Smoot married Elizabeth Davis. q.v. 
2. Edward Smoot. q.v. 
3. Josias Smoot married twice. q.v. 
4. Benjamin Smoot. q.v. 
5. Mary Smoot, born May 17, 1739. 
6. Arthur Smoot married Catherine Farrand. q.v. 
7. Margaretta Smoot, born Dec. 13, 1748, married William, son of 
Thomas and Elizabeth (Edwards) Dent. Issues: Alexander; 
Thomas; Jane; Catherine; and Nathan Smoot. 
On January 7, 1729, there was surveyed for Thomas Smoot "Monday's 
Disappointment" of 100 acres which was later conveyed to William 
Smoot. In the same year he patented "Smoot's Hazard" of 121 acres, 
lying on Fresh Creek in Charles County, which in 1749 he deeded to 
Benjamin Fendall for 20 shillings. In 1756 he patented "Smoot's 
Venture", containing 343 acres. 
The will of Thomas Smoot was dated August 28, 1781, and probated 
November 5, 1782, in Charles County. Edward, Josias, and Benjamin 
received equaled portions of the dwelling-plantation "Thompson's Hope". 
Samuel was bequeathed 20 acres of "Gateson Addition", while Arthur 
was devised the remainder of the tract whereon he was then residing. 
Mary Smoot, the spinster, was willed 20 acres of "Thompson's Hope", 
and his daughter, Margaretta Dent, received a number of negroes. 

83

The inventory of the personal estate was taken on November 18, 1782, 
with Samuel, Arthur, and Josiah as the executors. Walter Burch and 
William Anderson were the bondsmen. Distribution was ultimately made 
to the seven named children in the will. 


SAMUEL SMOOT5
(17-- - 1792)
Samuel Smoot, son of Thomas and Abigail Smoot, was born in William 
and Mary Parish, Charles County. His wife was Elizabeth, daughter of 
Edward and Anne Davis. Her father in his will, probated in Charles 
County, June 13, 1764, bequeathed to his beloved daughter, Elizabeth 
Smoot, one shilling and no more. 


Children of Samuel and Elizabeth (Davis) Smoot
1. John Smoot married Tomsen ----. q.v. 
2. Edward Smoot married Susannah Hitch. q.v. 
3. Thomas Smoot married Catherine ----. q.v. 
4. Betsy Abigail Monica Smoot married Thomas Roberts, marriage 
bond Feb. 28, 1791, Fauq. Co., Va. 
5. Anne Smoot. 
6. Josiah Smoot. 
Samuel Smoot maintained his seat at "Hunt's Venture" in Bryan Town 
Hundred, where in 1783 he was taxed for 100 acres of land, with seven in 
family. A few years later at the first census, his household consisted of 
himself, his two maiden daughters, and four slaves. 
The will of Samuel Smoot was dated October 8, 1792, and proved in 
Charles County on November 12, 1792, by Arthur Smoot, Joseph 
Morton, and James Canter. Elizabeth his wife was bequeathed realty 
during widowhood. Edward received one-half of the land purchased from 
William Gerard, lying in Fauquier County, Virginia, while John received 
the remainder. Anne was devised "Maidstone" purchased from James 
Carrico and one-half of "Hunt's Venture", the dwelling-plantation, while 
Betsy Abigail Monica was willed the other half. Thomas and Josiah 
received minor bequests. 


EDWARD SMOOT5
Edward Smoot, son of Thomas and Abigail Smoot, migrated from his 
home in Charles County, Maryland, to Fauquier County, Virginia, where 
in 1784 he deeded "Thompson's Hope" to his brother Josiah Smoot. Four 
years later he conveyed "Gates' Addition" to his brother Arthur. 


84

The first available census of Fauquier County, Virginia, that is 1810, 
shows Edward Smoot the head of a family with a number of children (5 
girls and 3 boys), the births of which ranged from after 1784 to before 
1810. In 1820 he was again the head of a family with 4 girls and 5 boys. 
Both census schedules show him to be a fair owner of slaves. 
Unfortunately, the names of his children have not been established and 
therefore many missing links remain unbridged. Marriage licenses were 
issued to the following maidens of Fauquier County, who were of ages to 
be his daughters: Polly Smoot and James Wood, Aug. 8, 1806; Carey 
Smoot and John Shumate, Feb. 6, 1808; Asenath C. Smoot and Presley 
R. Hett, Jan. 23, 1808. 


JOSIAH SMOOT5
(17-- - 1797)
Josiah Smoot, son of Thomas and Abigail Smoot, was born in old 
William and Mary Parish, Charles County. He married first Christian, the 
daughter of James Grant. After the death of his first wife, he on 
December 22, 1781, married Anne Douglas, by the Rev. John 
McPherson, of William and Mary Parish. It is proved that one son was of 
the first union, but some doubt exists whether Samuel was of the first or 
second marriage. 


Children of Josiah Smoot
1. Charles Smith Smoot, born Dec. 9, 1774, married Rachel ----. 
2. Samuel Smoot married Lydia Gill. q.v. 
During the Revolutionary War, Josiah Smoot served as a private in 
Captain Richard Bennett Mitchell's Company, of Charles County 
Militia.1 
On December 1, 1784, Josiah Smoot purchased from Edward Smoot, his 
brother, then a resident of Virginia, the latter's share of "Thompson's 
Hope". At the tax list of 1783, Josiah Smoot was seized of 195 acres of 
the above-named tract, formerly being a part of Calvert's Manor, lying in 
Bryan Town Hundred. 
The will of Josiah Smoot was dated September 9, 1796, and proved in 
Charles County on November 5, 1797, by John Adams and Joseph 
Morton. His wife, Anne, was devised the dwelling-plantation during life 
then to his two sons, Charles and Samuel, who also received "Maidstone" 
and "New Branford". 


1Unpublished Maryland Records, D. A. R. Library, vol. 2, p. 288. 

85

His executrix, Anne Smoot, had the inventory of his estate recorded on 
December 5, 1797, at which time Deborah Smoot and Catherine Smoot 
signed as the kinswomen. The final account on his estate was rendered in 
1805, by Samuel Smoot, showing distribution to the widow and two 
sons. 
Ultimately Charles Smoot instituted action against the estate for the 
services of a negro willed to his mother, Christian Smoot, by her father 
James Grant, then claimed by Anne Smoot, the executrix of Josiah 
Smoot. The case was decided in favor of the plaintiff, while Anne Smoot 
was ordered to pay œ97/19/6 current money and interest from December 
9, 1795, the day on which Charles Smoot became of age. The widow 
died intestate, whereon the court on January 29, 1806, ordered an 
inventory of the personal effects. 
The eldest son, Charles Smith Smoot, died without issues during 
February 1807. By his will he named his wife, Rachel, conveying to her 
the plantation on which Samuel Burroughs then lived known as "Foxes 
Race" of 100 acres and the homestead. A bequest was made to his 
brother, Samuel, while the residue was devised to his wife. He named his 
friend, Dr. Charles Smoot, as the executor. John C. Waters, Walter B. 
Waters, and Zachariah Moran witnessed the instrument. 


BENJAMIN SMOOT5
(17-- - 1812)
Benjamin Smoot, son of Thomas and Abigail Smoot, was born in Trinity 
Parish, Charles County, Maryland. Before the settlement of the estate of 
his father who died in 1782, he moved to Henrico County, Virginia, 
where on December 3, 1784, he purchased from John Ellis and Susannah 
his wife 30 acres of land lying on Allen's Branch. The deed was 
witnessed by William Alley, Stephen Ellis, William Henley, and 
Nicholas Connaway. 
Benjamin Smoot married in Maryland where his eldest children were 
born, but the identity of his wife has not been established through public 
records. The following list of children may or may not be complete: 


Children of Benjamin Smoot
1. Barton Smoot married Mary Alley. q.v. 
2. Josiah Smoot married Elizabeth Brown. q.v. 
3. Thomas Smoot married Janney Powers. q.v. 
4. Betsy Smoot married Samuel Vaughan. License Henrico Co., 
Jan. 10, 1798. 
5. Mary Smoot married William Brown. License Nov. 24, 1802, 
Henrico Co. 

86

6. Judith Smoot married Thomas Shaw. License Jan. 26, 1807, 
Henrico Co. 
7. Nancy Smoot married William Powell. License Dec. 12, 1791, 
Henrico Co. 
Benjamin Smoot died intestate. The personal estate was appraised at 
œ71/1/3, and recorded in Henrico County on June 1, 1812. The papers 
were signed by Robert Massie, William Ellis, and William Alley. 


ARTHUR SMOOT5
(1742 - 1797)
Arthur Smoot, son of Thomas and Abigail Smoot, was born August 16, 
1742, in Trinity Parish, Charles County. He married Catherine, born 
October 8, 1746, the daughter of John and Mary (Stonestreet) Farrand, 
who was probably a widow at the time of this marriage. John Farrand in 
his will proved in Charles County during 1774 named his daughter 
Catherine Smoot. As next of kin, Arthur Smoot signed the inventory 
papers of his brother-in-law, Hezekiah Farrand, on June 21, 1783. 


Children of Arthur and Catherine (Farrand) Smoot
1. Thomas Barton Smoot married Louisa ----. q.v. 
2. Eleanor Smoot married John, son of George Adams. 
3. Mary Abigail Smoot married John Harrison. 
4. Rezin Smoot married Martha Dent. q.v. 
5. Catherine Smoot married Thomas G. Waters. 
6. Deborah Smoot. 
7. George Smoot married Mary ----. q.v. 
Arthur Smoot in 1781 purchased from James Carrico, son of Peter, a 
portion of "Maidstone", at which time Elizabeth Carrico, wife, waived 
her dower rights. In 1788 he purchased from Samuel Smoot "Gates' 
Addition". According to the tax list of 1783, he was the head of a family 
of nine in Bryan Town Hundred and was seized of the following tracts of 
land--"Gates' Addition" of 95 acres; "Keith's Hope" 18 acres; "Carrico's 
Hope" 94 acres; "Smoot's Venture" 8 acres; and "Maidstone" 12 acres. 
He died intestate. The inventory of his personal estate was taken on 
October 19, 1797, with Eleanor Adams and Deborah Smoot signing as 
the next of kin, and Catherine Smoot as the administratrix. Her 
bondsmen were Josiah Smoot and John Adams. The inventory showed 
personalty delivered to the deceased's daughter, Eleanor, at the time of 
her marriage to John Adams, also those to Mary Abigail at her marriage 
to John Harrison. 

87

The will of his widow was dated October 9, 1799, and proved in Charles 
County by Zephaniah Farrand and Edward Smoot. She devised 
personalty to her son George and to the children of her deceased son 
Thomas Barton Smoot. The residue was to be divided among "my other 
six children". Her son Rezin was named as executor. 
At the April term of the court in 1801, Rezin Smoot, the administrator of 
Catherine Smoot, rendered an account on the petition of Anthony Collins 
Gray, guardian to Roger Collins Gray, Anne Gray, Mary Anne Gray, and 
George Gray, the representatives of Edward Gray, late of Charles County 
deceased.2 Anthony Gray stated that he was resident of Virginia and that 
the children were of sufficient age to receive portions of the deceased's 
estate except George who was still a minor. 
The final settlement of the estate of Catherine Smoot was made on 
December 10, 1805, by Rezin Smoot and showed distribution to George 
Smoot, the six Smoot children, and the three children of Thomas Barton 
Smoot. 
The final account on the estate of Arthur Smoot was made at the same 
time, by Rezin Smoot, administrator de non bonis. The account showed 
the widow's share, and those of the following--Thomas Barton, Eleanor, 
Mary Abigail, Deborah, Rezin, Catherine, and George. 


JOHN SMOOT6
(17-- - 1797)
John Smoot, son of Samuel and Elizabeth Smoot, was born about 1740 in 
Charles County, Maryland. By the will of his father in 1792, he received 
realty in Fauquier County, Virginia, where he was already seated. His 
wife was Tomsen (Thomasine) ----. 


Children of John and Tomsen Smoot
1. Leonard Smoot married Milly Courtney. q.v. 
2. John Smoot married Margaret Hitch. q.v. 
3. Mary Smoot. 
4. Elizabeth Smoot. 
5. James Smoot married Frances. q.v. 
6. Barton Smoot. 
7. William Smoot. 
8. Claiborne Smoot married Nancy Payne. q.v. 
9. Charity Smoot married Colston Payne. Bond Oct. 20, 1790, 
Fauq. Co. 


2It is assumed that Edward Gray was the son or son-in-law of Catherine 
Smoot 
by a former marriage. 


88

10. Lewis Smoot married Elizabeth Marcus and Elizabeth Anderson. 
Bonds, Feb. 8, 1799, and Feb. 8, 1800, Fauq. Co. 
11. Enoch Smoot. q.v. 
12. Frances Smoot married Lewis Jones. Bond, Jan. 31, 1799, Fauq. 
Co. 
13. Thomas Smoot, died during war. 
The will of John Smoot was dated September 5, 1796, and proved in 
Fauquier County, Virginia, on June 26, 1797, by Aquilla Davis, D. 
Wood, and William Wood. He named his twelve children, and 
bequeathed his wife all rights and title in his lands and moveable goods. 
This widow was living as late as 1810, but did not appear as the head of a 
family at the 1820 census. 
His sons' William and Thomas, both enlisted in the Revolutionary Army 
as privates during April 1776. William served in Captain Henry 
Fauntleroy's Company, 5th Virginia Regiment of Foot, commanded by 
Colonel Josiah Parke. During the first year of his services he participated 
in the battles of Brunswick and White Plains. At the former place, he 
reenlisted. In February 1778, he was engaged in the campaign around 
West Point. At muster, dated Pompton, December 1778, he was recorded 
as being ill at West Point, likewise, the musters of January and February 
at Middle Brooke, New Jersey, reported him ill. He was discharged 
February 28, 1779. 
Thomas Smoot, his brother, enlisted at the same time in the identical 
company, and reenlisted in June 1778 for three years. In February 1778, 
he was reported ill at West Point, in Captain Bentley's Company, 3rd 
Virginia Regiment, commanded by Colonel William Heth. Subsequent 
muster rolls show him ill at West Point, where he died January 11, 1779. 


EDWARD SMOOT6
Edward Smoot, son of Samuel and Elizabeth Smoot, was born in Charles 
County, Maryland. By the will of his father he received land purchased 
from William Gerard lying in Fauquier County, Virginia, where he 
established his homestead. On June 11, 1788, bond was offered for his 
marriage to Susannah Hitch, with Christopher Hitch as the surety. 
One does not find him as the head of a family in Fauquier County at the 
census of 1810, but it is believed that he was the Edward Smoot who was 
the one in 1820, with 5 boys all under 26 years of age and 5 girls all 
under 26 years. The following list of children is therefore probably 
incomplete. 


89


Children of Edward and Susannah (Hitch) Smoot
1. Thomas Smoot married Elizabeth Hett. q.v. 
2. Josias Smoot married Harriet Whitacre. q.v. 
3. Rebecca Smoot married Alexander Hitch. License Nov. 15, 1827, 
Fauq. Co. 
4. Aryanna Smoot married William P. Rogers. License Dec. 14, 1830, 
Fauq. Co. 
5. Elwen Smoot married Rebecca Anne Hirst. License Sept. 27, 1833, 
Fauq. Co. 
6. Samuel Smoot married Betsy Harris. q.v. 
7. Edward Smoot married Harriet G. Downing. q.v. 
On May 9, 1820, Edward Smoot purchased household goods from Henry 
H. Downing, of Fauquier County. On January 17, 1824, he deeded 
negroes to his wife Susannah and the following children--Josias, 
Rebecca, Aryanna, and Elwin. At the same date he assigned all debts to 
his son Thomas. The deeds were witnessed by John Neale, Edward 
Smoot Jr., Samuel Smoot, and Matthew Neale, and recorded on May 24, 
1824. As no further record of Edward Smoot exists in Fauquier County, 
it is probable the various deeds of conveyance were in lieu of a last will 
and testament. 
Consequently, five children are conclusively proved. It is assumed, 
however, that Samuel (named from his grandfather) and Edward (named 
from his father) two of the witnesses to the deeds of conveyance, are 
sons. 


THOMAS SMOOT6
(175- - 1824)
Thomas Smoot, son of Samuel and Elizabeth (Davis) Smoot, was born 
between the year 1750-1760 in Charles County, Maryland. His wife was 
Catherine (Caty) ----, born 1760-1770. He lived for a time in Fauquier 
County, Virginia, where his brothers settled and where it is believed that 
most of his children were born. The following children were named in 
his will--Betsy; John N. (q.v.); Samuel; Jacob; Caty; Nancy; Thomas; 
Charlotte; Polly; and Josiah. 
After 1800 Thomas Smoot migrated to Rowan County, North Carolina, 
where on May 9, 1810, he purchased from John Linster for $700 land on 
the north side of the South Yadkin River, "where Boon's Road crosses", 
containing 100 acres which had been granted by the State to Moses 
Linster. The transfer was proved by Harrod B. Pruit and Richmond C. 
Hughes. In August 1810, he deeded to John N. Smoot land for $150, at 
which time Samuel Smoot and Jacob Smoot witnessed the conveyance. 
On May 17, 1819, he sold another tract to John N. 

90

Smoot for $300, lying on the north side of the South Yadkin River, being 
part of the tract on which he was then living and adjacent to the dwelling 
of the said John N. Smoot. The deed was attested to by Josh Smoot. On 
December 7, 1819, he sold to John W. Linster for $500 land on the north 
side of the South Yadkin River, with Joseph Kincaid and Neal McGill as 
the witnesses. On August 2, 1830, he conveyed 200 acres of land to Jesse 
Tatum, with Joseph C. Pickler as the witness. The census of 1830 shows 
him as domiciled in the "forks of the Yadkin River". 
The will of Thomas Smoot was dated May 10, 1824, but it was not 
proved until the November session of the court in 1830, with James 
Owens as the testator. He bequeathed his wife Caty and daughters--
Betsy, Caty, Nancy, Charlotte, and Polly--all lands of which he was 
seized in Rowan County, including the dwelling-plantation and a small 
tract of woodland. To his sons--John N., Samuel, Jacob, Thomas, and 
Josiah--"that are about to advance themselves in different parts of the 
world far away from me I do not leave them any thing more than one 
dollar each". 


SAMUEL SMOOT6
(17-- - 1832)
Samuel Smoot, son of Josiah, claimed during his life that he was born in 
Virginia, though his father lived and died in Maryland. He married Lydia 
Gill, born 1790, in Maryland. 


Children of Samuel and Lydia (Gill) Smoot
1. Henry Smoot, born 1808, d.s.p. 
2. William E. Smoot, born 1814, married Elizabeth Perrine. q.v. 
3. Charles Smoot, born 1816, in Ky., d.s.p. 
4. Samuel Smoot, settled in New Orleans. 
5. Elizabeth Smoot, born 1817, married 1835 Alexander Hamilton 
Wall, of Scott Co., Ky. Issue: Garrett Smoot, born July 12, 
1845, served in Confederate Army; Lydia; Mary married Judge 
Lewis Apperson, of Mt. Sterling, Ky. 
On May 7, 1804, Samuel Smoot with his brother Charles S. Smoot 
deeded "Maidstone" to Joseph Norton. On January 13, 1808, he as a 
resident of Charles County, conveyed "New Cranford" to John Waters of 
John. At the 1810 census he was the head of a family in Charles County, 
with 10 slaves. 
Shortly after 1810 Samuel Smoot and his family migrated to Mason 
County, Kentucky, and settled at Limestone, later known as Maysville. 
On March 20, 1815, he and his wife Lydia, of Mason County, conveyed 


91

to Henry Gill, of Charles County, "Thompson's Hope" which had 
descended to Samuel Smoot through Josiah Smoot, deceased. On 
September 11, 1815, he and his wife, Edward Tabbs and Lettice his wife, 
Anne Gill, and Erasmus Gill, all of Mason County, Kentucky, deeded to 
Mary Johnson, of Charles County, the tract "Foxes Race". 
The will of Samuel Smoot was proved in Mason County, Kentucky, on 
December 26, 1832, naming his five children. 


BARTON SMOOT6
(176- - 1845)
Barton Smoot, son of Benjamin, was born in Maryland between the years 
1765 and 1770, and was brought to Henrico County, Virginia, by his 
parent as a boy. On February 26, 1798, he secured license in Henrico 
County, to marry Mary Alley. Only one child has been established, that 
is, Richard who married Mary Jane Cottrell, on August 25, 1828. 
On August 27, 1814, Barton Smoot enlisted as a private in Captain 
William B. Chamberlayne's Company of Artillery, attached to the 33rd 
Virginia Regiment, recruited in Henrico County. His enlistment expired 
on November 30, 1814. 
He deeded to his son Richard for natural love and affections on June 10, 
1835, land lying on Turnpike Road comprising of 15 acres in Henrico 


County. This conveyance was witnessed by Charles Cottrell, and Binford 
S. Brown. 
Barton Smoot died intestate. His personal estate was appraised at 
$1,238.75, and returned to the court on January 17, 1846. 
The following is from an old Smoot Bible, the owner of which could give 
no information as to the original owner nor its connection with her 
branch of the family. The first notation is the marriage of Richard Smoot 
and Mary Jane Cottrell, the date of which is identical with the license 
issued in Henrico County. 
Richard Smoot, born June 14, 1810. 
Mary J. Smoot, born Aug. 22, 1808. 
Samuel W. Smoot, born Jan. 31, 1804. 
Martha L. Smoot, born Dec. 15, 1809. 
Benjamin Sylvester Smoot, born May 24, 1835. 
Mary J. Smoot, died Aug. 5, 1838. 
Martha L. Smoot, died Mar. 1, 1845. 
Mary Ann Smoot, born Feb. 3, 1848. 
Rebecca Jane Smoot, born Feb. 4, 1848. 
William Thomas Smoot, born Feb. 12, 1852. 
Nannie Lee Smoot, born Nov. 9, 1854, died Aug. 29, 1856. 
William Smoot, born Feb. 3, 1848. 


92



JOSIAH SMOOT6
Josiah Smoot, son of Benjamin, was born sometime after 1765 in 
Maryland. He came to Henrico County, Virginia, with his parents in his 
youth, and there on August 4, 1806, he secured license to marry 
Elizabeth, the daughter of Micajah Brown. 
Josiah Smoot enlisted August 27, 1814, as a private in Captain William 
B. Chamberlayne's Company of artillery raised in Henrico County and 
was attached to Truehart's Regiment, 33rd Virginia. He was stationed at 
one time at Camp Bottom's Bridge. 
On July 24, 1824, he acknowledged an indebtedness to Samuel Cottrell 
and Royal Shepherd, executors of the estate of Charles W. Cottrell, and 
therefore sold personal property to Samuel Brown and Obadiah Duval to 
meet his obligations. 
He was not the head of a family in Henrico County in 1830, according to 
the census for that year. There was an Elizabeth Smoot, however, with 
three girls between the ages of 10 and 15 years, and one girl between 5 
and 10 years of age. 


THOMAS SMOOT6
(1787 - 18--)
Thomas Smoot, son of Benjamin, was born about 1787, in Henrico 
County, Virginia. On April 10, 1811, he secured license in Henrico 
County to marry Virginia (Jenny) Powers, born 1796 in Virginia. The 
following children are known, that there were others is possible. 


Children of Thomas and Virginia (Powers) Smoot
1. Sally Smoot, born 1814, died June 28, 1886. 
2. William Henry Smoot married Siana M. Lee. 
3. Nancy Smoot, born 1821, died Mar. 11, 1886. 
4. Elizabeth Jane Smoot, born 1824, died Jan. 6, 1891. 
5. Thomas Barton Smoot married Mary Elizabeth Redd. q.v. 
It is probable that he was the Thomas Smoot who served as a private in 
Captain Hezekiah Henley's Company of Riflemen, First Virginia 
Regiment, commanded by Colonel Clark. Records show that he was in 
service from February 7 to May 14, 1813, and was encamped at Fort 
Norfolk. In the same company were also Joseph Smoot and Barton 
Smoot. 
In 1850 Thomas Smoot, engaged in agriculture, was the head of his 
household in Henrico with his wife and three maiden daughters. He died 
sometime after this date

93


THOMAS BARTON SMOOT6
(17-- - 179-)
Thomas Barton Smoot, son of Arthur and Catherine (Farrand) Smoot, 
was born in Trinity Parish, Charles County, Maryland. His wife was 
Louisa ----. 


Children of Thomas Barton and Louise Smoot
1. Walter Smoot, born Jan. 18, 1789.(*) 
2. Arthur Smoot, born Jan. 18, 1789. 
3. George Smoot, born Mar. 31, 1792. 
4. Anne Smoot, born Mar. 28, 1794. 
Thomas Barton Smoot died sometime before 1800, at which time his 
widow appeared as the head of the family and the guardian of her four 
minor children. She apparently died soon afterwards, for by 1803 Rezin 
Smoot, the uncle, was their guardian. 


REZIN SMOOT6
(17-- - 1836)
Rezin Smoot, son of Arthur and Catherine (Farrand) Smoot, was born 
sometime between the years 1775 and 1794, according to the census 
records. His wife was Martha, the daughter of Gideon and Mary Dent. 
His plantation lay in Bryantown Hundred. 


Children of Rezin and Martha (Dent) Smoot
1. Benjamin Smoot married Betty ----. q.v. 
2. William Smoot, born 1823, unmarried 1860. 
3. Mary Smoot. 
4. Samuel Smoot, born 1827, unmarried 1860. 
5. Elizabeth Smoot. 
6. Anne Smoot. 
During the summers of 1813 and 1814, Rezin Smoot served under 
Captain Alexander Dent in Hawkins' Maryland Regiment. Later he was 
transferred to Captain Hugh Cox's Company, same regiment. On 
February 14, 1821, he and his wife Martha conveyed to George Smoot 
(*)Note: Walter Smoot, of St. Genevieve Co., Territory of Missouri, 
enlisted 
Aug. 13, 1814, for 60-day service in Capt. Henry Poston's Company of 
Mounted 
Militia, under the command of Lieut.-Col. Dodge. His outfit 
rendezvoused at 
St. Louis "82 miles distant from his home". He was transferred to Capt. 
Edward 
Hempstead's Company, but was rejected "on account of an inflamation 
on one of 
his legs". Could these be the same? 


94

"Higdon's Chance", described as that tract which had been bequeathed to 
Martha Smoot by the will of her father Gideon Dent. Rezin Smoot died 
on December 2, 1836, and according to the records of Trinity Parish, he 
was interred on the plantation of Mr. B. Adams. 
His will was dated November 13, 1836, and proved in Charles County on 
February 20, 1837, by John Hughes, Alexander Boarman, and Benjamin 
Adams. He bequeathed his entire landed estate to his wife Martha Smoot 
during life, then to his sons Benjamin and William. A third son Samuel 
received $400. Mary, Elizabeth, and Anne were devised personalty. 


ENSIGN GEORGE SMOOT6
George Smoot, son of Arthur and Catherine (Farrand) Smoot, was a 
minor at the death of his mother in 1799, and was placed under the 
guardianship of his uncle Rezin Smoot. Charles Smith Smoot and 
Thomas Gibbons offered bond. 
George Smoot volunteered on July 1, 1813 for the War of 1812 and was 
mustered into service at the plantation of Major Henry S. Yates. While 
serving as a sergeant in the company of Captain Alexander Dent, 
Hawkins' Regiment, he was brevetted ensign. During the summer of 
1814 he was again in service as ensign in John Moran's Detachment, 
First Maryland Regiment, and at another time in Lieutenant George 
Gardiner's Detachment. Prior to the war he had married Mary ----. 


Children of George and Mary Smoot
1. Arthur D. Smoot, born 1816, unmarried 1850, with realty of $2,200, 
at Allen's Fresh, Chas. Co. 
2. Mary Catherine Smoot, born 1818, married Stoughton Warren 
Dent, son of Hatch and Susannah (Edwards) Dent. Issues: 
Catherine; Stoughton Hubert; Hugh; Lydia; Mary; George H.; 
Columbia; and Ella. 
3. Theophilus Smoot, born 1819, married Amelia Harrison. q.v. 
4. Josias Smoot, born 1822, died Apr. 11, 1850. 
5. Alexander Smoot, born 1822, unmarried 1860. 
6. George S. Smoot, born 1823, unmarried 1850. 
7. Emeline Anne Smoot, buried Sept. 25, 1843. 
George Smoot died before 1830, inasmuch as his widow Mary Smoot 
was the head of the household at the census for that year. She was made 
the guardian of her minor children, at which time Theophilus Dent and 
Edward Pye were her bondsmen. The homestead lay in Bryantown 
Hundred. 


95


LEONARD SMOOT7
(176- - 18--)
Leonard Smoot, son of John and Tomsen Smoot, was born sometime 
before 1765, undoubtedly in Fauquier County, Virginia. He married 
Milly, the daughter of Courtney Norman, presumably of Culpeper 
County. 
On August 12, 1795, Leonard Smoot and Milly his wife, William 
Norman and Mary his wife, and Ezekiel Norman and Nancy his wife, all 
of Culpeper and Fauquier counties, conveyed to John Norman for œ55 a 
tract of land containing 106 acres in Bromfield Parish on the little fork of 
the Rappahannock River, formerly belonging to Courtney Norman, 
deceased, whereon John Norman was then domiciled. Among the 
witnesses was Courtney Norman II. 
The first available census for Fauquier County (1810) shows Leonard 
Smoot as the head of a family, with a wife born before 1765, and four 
girls and four boys, all born after 1794. Only three children, however, 
have been proved. 


Children of Leonard and Milly (Norman) Smoot
1. Elizabeth Smoot married Joseph Anderson. Her father gave his 
formal consent on Sept. 24, 1803. 
2. Leonard Smoot married Abigail Heaton. q.v. 
3. Courtney Norman Smoot married Margaret ----. q.v. 
In 1803 Leonard Smoot sold household goods to Becket & Blackwell. 
On April 20, 1810, he, with his mother Tomsen Smoot, leased land in 
Fauquier County during "their lives" from John Marshall and James M. 
Marshall. He was not the head of a family in Fauquier County in 1810. 


JOHN SMOOT7
(17-- - 1839)
John Smoot, son of John and Tomsen Smoot, was born perhaps in Lord 
Fairfax Manor, Fauquier County, Virginia. On December 16, 1789, bond 
was offered for his marriage with Peggy, the daughter of Christopher 
Hitch, of Fauquier County. His will, proved in Fauquier County, August 
26, 1839, named his wife Margaret as the sole heir. His personal estate 
was appraised at $1,592.27. At the subsequent sale Margaret Smoot was 
the only purchaser bearing the family name. His widow died in 1842, 
when she willed most of her estate (negroes) to the State of Virginia. 


96


JAMES SMOOT7
(1764 - 1843)
James Smoot, son of John and Tomsen Smoot, was born May 25, 1764, 
in Lord Fairfax Manor, Fauquier County, Virginia, according to his own 
statement. During the Revolutionary War, he was drafted for three 
months and served under Captain Francis Triplett. His outfit joined the 
troops under the command of Colonel Daniel Morgan and marched to 
Mecklenburg County, North Carolina. Upon their return to Fauquier 
County five or six months hence, he was honorably discharged. Later he 
substituted for Jacob Krim and was in active service for three months. He 
returned home during June 1781, and again substituted, but this time for 
Manoah Crawley. He was present at the surrender of Lord Cornwallis, 
and afterwards guarded prisoners at Winchester. 
In 1783 he migrated to Wilkes County, North Carolina, where he 
continued to live until his death on April 29, 1843. By the Rev. James 
Fletcher, of Wilkes County, he was married to Fanny ----, born 1757. 
Under the act of 1832, James Smoot was granted a revolutionary 
pension. After his death, his widow applied for a pension and received 
one until her death in Wilkes County, on December 5, 1848. In 1853 
William Smithy and Elisha Vickers stated that Susannah Parker and 
Nancy Vickers were the only surviving children. 


CLAIBORNE SMOOT7
Claiborne Smoot, son of John and Tomsen Smoot, was born prior to 
1784 in Fauquier County, Virginia. On February 4, 1790, he secured 
license in his native county to marry Mary Payne. At the first available 
census for Fauquier County, that is 1810, he was the head of a family, 
with a number of young children. The schedule shows that he had at least 
six daughters and two sons, but only one child has been established--
William Payne Smoot. (q.v.) By 1820 Claiborne Smoot had left Fauquier 
County, and in 1825 one finds him a tax payer on 73 acres of land in 
Fleming County, Kentucky. 


ENOCH SMOOT7
(1777 - 18--)
Enoch Smoot, son of John and Tomsen Smoot, was born 1777 in 
Fauquier County, Virginia. During the War of 1812 he served as a 
private in Captain James Payne's Company of Riflemen, attached to the 
41st Virginia Regiment of Colonel Branham, formed in Fauquier County. 

97

Before 1820 he settled with some of his brothers in Fleming County, 
Kentucky, where he married and raised a family. The only child 
established, however, is Elizabeth J. Smoot who married Abner Boyd in 
Flemington County, according to license issued November 2, 1849. In 
1850 Enoch Smoot made his home with his son-in-law Abner Boyd, born 
1816, in Virginia. Elizabeth, the latter's wife, was born 1835 in 
Kentucky, and in the household were three Boyd children whose ages 
would not place them as those of Elizabeth. 


THOMAS SMOOT7
Thomas Smoot, son of Edward and Susannah (Hitch) Smoot, was born in 
Fauquier County, Virginia. He married Elizabeth Hett. One son--
Thaddeus Norris Smoot who married Mildred Jeffries (q.v.)--has been 
proved. 
In 1848 a law suit developed over the landed estate of Peter Hett, late of 
Fauquier County, who in 1802 willed his land to his widow Hannah 
during life. In 1846 his widow Hannah Hett died leaving a will which 
bequeathed her estate to her grandson Thaddeus N. Smoot. The heirs 
consequently brought action, declaring that the interest of the widow was 
only life and that at her death the heirs should share equally. The 
following plaintiffs were all children of Peter and Hannah Hett--Presley 
Hett (he married Asenath C. Smoot January 23, 1808); Harrison Hett; 
Alexander Hett; Thaddeus Hett; Mary Anderson, widow of Taliaferro 
Anderson; Thomas Palmer and Susan his wife; Alexander Anderson and 
Nancy his wife; Thomas Smoot and Elizabeth his wife; Humphrey 
Hopper and Hannah his wife; and James Freeman and Frances his wife. 


JOSIAS SMOOT7
(1805 - 1857)
Josias Smoot, son of Edward and Susannah (Hitch) Smoot, was born 
1804 in Fauquier County, Virginia. On January 2, 1830, he secured 
license in his native county to marry Harriet Whitacre, born 1811, in 
Virginia. 


Children of Josias and Harriet (Whitacre) Smoot
1. Edward M. Smoot, C. S. A. q.v. 
2. Sarah Smoot, born 1833. 
3. Thomas Smoot, born 1837. 
4. Samuel Smoot, born 1838. 
5. Lucinda Smoot, born 1840. 
6. John R. Smoot, born 1842. 
7. Isaac N. Smoot married Alma Walker. q.v. 


98

8. Josias Smoot, born 1846. 
9. Harriet A. Smoot, born 1848. 
10. Marie A. Smoot, born 1850. 
The first three children were born in Virginia, but after 1834, Josias 
Smoot and his young family migrated westward and before 1837 was 
living in Missouri, where Thomas and the remaining children were born. 
The above named children, except Edward who was at school, comprised 
his household in 1850, when he was the proprietor of a farm in Round 
Grove Township, Marion County, Missouri. He died in 1857. 
His eldest son Edward M. Smoot enlisted April 20, 1862, in Marion 
County, Missouri, in Co. A, First Northeast Missouri Cavalry under 
Colonel McCullough of the Confederate Forces, and gave his life to the 
cause. His popularity led to his election as First Lieutenant on July 2, 
1862, but the company was not fully organized until July 29, 1862, 
owing to the presence of the Yankee Army. The company was forced to 
disperse in squads on October 18, and was ordered to assemble in 
Arkansas. On November 25, the entire company, each and every man 
well mounted, arrived at Pocahontas, Arkansas, and reported to Colonel 
Burbridge, but on December 1, 1862, was reorganized at Mill Creek, 
Izard County, Arkansas, Lieutenant Smoot was present with his company 
at muster on July 28, 1863, at Moore's Mill, Calloway County, Missouri, 
but was killed by the enemy on August 10, 1863, near Stacton, Missouri. 
A number of citizens of Marion County, made the following deposition 
on January 23, 1865. "That we were residing in Palmyra in 1862 and that 
in the winter of that year one Edward Smoot a Rebel soldier was 
confined in the Palmyra Jail . . . that he made his escape from the jail and 
was arrested by a Federal soldier (Andrew Alsman) of Colonel Glover's 
Regiment from whom he escaped after quite a struggle in which he 
wristed Alsman's pistol from him . . . We have no doubt that Smoot was 
harbored and concealed in the city of Palmyra while the soldiers were 
searching for him". 


SAMUEL SMOOT7
Samuel Smoot, the believed son of Edward and Susannah (Hitch) Smoot, 
was born in Fauquier County, Virginia, around 1790. From August 1 to 
September 14, 1814, he served as a private in Captain James Payne's 
Company of Riflemen, attached to the 44th Virginia Regiment which 
was formed in Fauquier County. He was stationed at one time at Camp 
Alexandria. 

99

On Feburary 24, 1812, Samuel Smoot secured license in Fauquier 
County to marry Betsy Harris, the daughter of Thomas Harris. Peculiarly, 
he was not listed as the head of a family in 1820, but he and his wife of 
"Fauquier County" were among the representatives of Thomas Harris 
who conveyed land to Samuel Chancellor, of Rappahannock County, 
sometime after 1820. 


EDWARD SMOOT7
Edward Smoot, the believed son of Edward and Susannah (Hitch) Smoot, 
was born in Fauquier County, Virginia. There on December 7, 1830, he 
secured license to marry Harriet G. Downing. 
In 1833 he recovered judgment in the court of chancery against Mary 
Brown and William Brown, in which a John Smoot was involved, over a 
crop of corn. Thomas Smoot made the following deposition: "I was 
living on my brother's (Edward) land in his house the year before he had 
a crop of corn which was near the house. He told me that he agreed to 
have Mrs. Brown 14 bbls. and perhaps 2 bushels delivered about 1828 or 
1829". 


JOHN N. SMOOT7
(1786 - 18--)
John N. Smoot, son of Thomas and Catherine Smoot, was born 1786 in 
Virginia. He migrated to Rowan County, North Carolina, with his parent, 
where in 1813 he was listed as a patroller in the militia company of 
Captain Pearson. In February 1814, he was appointed constable of his 
district, at which time Richmond Pearson Jr. and Harod B. Pruitt offered 
bond. On December 23, 1818, John Pearson conveyed to him two lots of 
ground in Rowan County, with J. A. Pearson as a witness. On May 17, 
1819, he purchased from his father 55 acres of land. On October 8, 1819, 
he sold to Susannah Henderson, of Botetourt County, Virginia, for $100 
one-half lot of ground in the town of Clinton, Iredell County, North 
Carolina. On September 18, 1820, he deeded to Richard Williams 150 
acres of land on the north side of the South Yadkin River. The transfer 
was witnessed by John Clement and Godfrey Clement. 


Children of John N. Smoot
1. Elizabeth B. Smoot, born 1818. 
2. Charlotte W. Smoot, born 1822. 
3. Narcissa P. Smoot, born 1828. 
4. Malinda M. Smoot, born 1830. 
5. Thomas Randolph Smoot, born 1834, later of Union City, Tenn. 


100

6. Richmond Kelley Smoot, married Sarah Jane Graham. q.v. 
7. Margaret Smoot, born 1838. 
8. John N. Smoot, M. D., of Fulton, Ky., C. S. A., wounded at Bull 
Run; died in Texas. 
9. Benjamin F. Smoot. 
He ultimately settled at the present town of Huntingdon in Carroll 
County, Tennessee, which was formerly a part of the Jackson's Purchase 
of 1821. At the first census of Carroll County in 1830 John N. Smoot was 
the head of a large family of twelve and two slaves. 
At the age of 64 he was the proprietor of a moderate-sized tannery 
establishment in 1850. The senior feminine member of his household 
was Elizabeth H. Smoot, born 1803 in Tennessee. The next in matter of 
age was Elizabeth B. Smoot, born 1818 in North Carolina, who may or 
may not be the daughter of the senior Elizabeth. All other children were 
born in Tennessee. The names of the foregoing children were given by 
their nephew and were substantiated by the 1850 census with the 
exception of John Jr. and Benjamin who probably were away from home 
at that time. 


WILLIAM E. SMOOT7
(1814 - 1887)
William E. Smoot, son of Samuel and Lydia (Gill) Smoot, was born 1814 
in Mason County, Kentucky. In that county he obtained license on 
October 16, 1837, to marry Elizabeth Perrine, born 1817, in Kentucky, 
and the sister of William Perrine. The following children composed his 
household at the census of 1850 in Mason County: 


Children of William and Elizabeth (Perrine) Smoot
1. Lydia Ellen Smoot, born 1839. 
2. William Perrine Smoot, born Nov. 23, 1840, died May 26, 1909, 
married Mary K. Gordon. 
3. Henry Gill Smoot, born 1843. 
4. Charles Smith Smoot, born 1845. 
5. Samuel N. Smoot, born Dec. 11, 1847, married Oct. 15, 1874, Ella 
Gordon; resided in Barton Co., Mo. 
Upon an adjoining plantation in 1850 lived his widowed mother Lydia 
Smoot, born in Maryland, with her two unmarried sons, Henry and 
Charles. William P. Smoot died at the age of 73, and his wife at the age 
of 70. 

101


THOMAS BARTON SMOOT, C. S. A.7
(1837 - 1872)
Thomas Barton Smoot, son of Thomas and Virginia (Powers) Smoot, 
was born January 12, 1837, in Chesterfield County, Virginia. He married 
Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Temple Redd. Late in 1861 Thomas Barton 
Smoot enlisted in Company A, 24th Virginia Cavalry, commanded by 
Captain Dabney and attached to the forces under General J. E. B. Stuart. 
He was taken a prisoner by the Northern Army at Emmanuel Church, 
Brooke Hill, Henrico County, during the raid of Generals McClellan and 
Dahlgren. He later escaped and returned to his regiment. He passed 
through Richmond on the night of April 2, 1865, enroute to Appomattox, 
where he surrendered with General Lee. He returned to his home in 
Henrico County in ill health and lived very quietly until death on July 17, 
1872. 


Children of Thomas Barton and Mary Elizabeth (Redd) Smoot
1. Mary Thomas Smoot, born Oct. 6, 1851, died Nov., 1919, married 
Thomas Kanfelt. Issues: Thomas, d.s.p.; Sally. 
2. Elizabeth Redd Smoot, born Aug. 15, 1853, d.s.p. July 3, 1919, 
married James M. Johnson. 
3. Martha Jane Smoot, born Oct. 21, 1855, died Jan., 1927, married 
Andrew Butler. Issues: Grace; Charles; and Edward. 
4. George Waverly Smoot, born Jan. 10, 1858, died Aug. 7, 1912, 
married 
Betty Lee Alexander. Issues: Sarah Redd, born Nov. 19, 
1892; Betty Alexander, born Mar. 28, 1894, married Apr. 12, 
1923, Donald L. Belcher; and Thomas Barton, born Dec. 20, 1903. 


BENJAMIN SMOOT7
(1811 - 18--)
Benjamin Smoot, son of Rezin and Martha (Dent) Smoot, was born 1811 
in Trinity Parish, Charles County, Maryland. His wife was Elizabeth 
----, born 1812 in Maryland. Births of some of the following children 
are registered in Trinity Parish, while others are established through the 
1850 and 1860 censuses--Mary Martha born 1841, Elizabeth 1843, 
Samuel 1844, Benjamin 1844, William R. March 1, 1845, John Henry 
February 24, 1847, Arthur 1850, and Anne 1859. 


THEOPHILUS SMOOT7
(1819 - 1891)
Theophilus Smoot, son of George and Mary Smoot, was born 1819 in 
Charles County, Maryland. In 1850 he maintained his own establishment 
with a child, Mary Smoot aged 6 years, as the only other member of his 
household. About 1851 he married Amelia Harrison. 


102


Children of Theophilus and Amelia (Harrison) Smoot
1. George Thomas Smoot, born 1852, d.s.p., married Lola ----. 
2. Winfield Smoot, born 1854, d.s.p. 1902, naming bros., sisters, and 
nephew Theophilus Hallie Smoot, of Theophilus. 
3. Joseph Alexander Smoot, born 1856, died Oct. 17, 1935, married 
Avie Tippett. 
4. Mary Smoot, born 1858. 
5. Robert Harrison Smoot. 
6. Theophilus Smoot. 
7. Amelia Alice Smoot married Charles H. Shepherd. 
8. Margaret Ida Smoot. 
9. Adaline Ellen Smoot. 
Theophilus Smoot maintained his seat near Charlotte Hall, where in 1860 
it was appraised at $13,000. In his household was also Henry Dent, born 
1842 in Maryland. 
The will of Theophilus Smoot was dated November 5, 1890, and proved 
in Charles County on February 3, 1891. George was bequeathed the farm 
near Dentsville and was named the executor, while Robert received the 
farm on Gilbert Swamp. Joseph was willed the farm on which he was 
residing known as "St. Margaret", and Winfield the farm called 
"Johnson's Place", lying partly in St. Mary's County. Other heirs were his 
children, Theophilus, Amelia wife of Charles H. Shepherd, Margaret, and 
Adaline, and his wife Amelia. He mentioned notes of William T. 
Briscoe, and Edward T. Briscoe and his wife Sallie. 
His son George Thomas Smoot died a resident of Charles County, and by 
his will proved November 16, 1920, he named his wife Lola, and devised 
his nephew Theophilus Smoot the Smoot's Family Bible, the sword used 
by "my" uncle Alexander Smoot, and other relics of the Smoot family. 
He finally requested that he be buried at All Faith's Churchyard in the 
Smoot's burial lot. 


LEONARD SMOOT8
Leonard Smoot, son of Leonard and Milly (Norman) Smoot, was born 
prior to 1784, in Fauquier County, Virginia. On May 24, 1799, he 
secured license in Culpeper County, Virginia, to marry Abigail Heaton. 
On February 25, 1807, he, described as a resident of Culpeper County, 
purchased from John Rea a lot in the town of Washington (now in 
Rappahannock County). By 1810 Leonard Smoot had migrated to 
Franklin County, Kentucky, where he was the head of a family in that 
year, with his wife, and a boy and two girls. 


103


COURTNEY NORMAN SMOOT8
(1803 - 18--)
Courtney Norman Smoot, son of Leonard and Milly (Norman) Smoot, 
was born about 1803 probably in Fauquier County, Virginia. About 1827 
he married Margaret ----, born 1808 in Virginia. To them were born 
Elizabeth in 1828, Ann in 1830, Mary in 1831, Frances in 1835, Charles 
in 1836, Martha in 1838, Virginia in 1840, John in 1842, Norman in 
1844, and Cecelia in 1850. 
Courtney Norman Smoot settled in Hampshire County, Virginia, and 
from the census record of 1850 for that county, the above-named children 
were taken. His sympathies during the Civil War are well examplified by 
his arrest and confinement in jail on Sepetmber 11, 1862 for "piloting 
rebels to capture Union pickets and violating the oath of allegiance". The 
following facts were recorded at his arrest--occupation, farmer; 
complexion, light; hair, gray; height, 5 feet 8 inches; eyes, blue; age, 60; 
whiskers, none; address, Burlington, Virginia. 


WILLIAM PAYNE SMOOT8
(1798 - 1872)
William Payne Smoot, son of Claiborne and Mary (Payne) Smoot, was 
born 1798 in what is now Flemington County, Kentucky. At maturity he 
settled in Harrison Township of Daviess County, Indiana, and about 1825 
he married Elizabeth Jett, born 1806 in Tennessee. All six children were 
born in Indiana. 


Children of William and Elizabeth (Jett) Smoot
1. James Franklin Smoot, born 1827, married Phoebe Smith. 
2. Claiborne J. Smoot, born 1832; pvt. Co. A, 52 Ind. Regt., Civil 
War. 
3. Warner Smoot married Lydia Robinson. q.v. 
4. William H. Smoot, born 1836. 
5. John Smoot, born 1840. 
6. George W. Smoot, born 1844; pvt. Co. D, 52 Ind. Regt., Civil War. 
The census of 1850 shows that he had in his household, besides his six 
children, Adlene Hamm, aged 4 years, born in Indiana, and Arlemisa 
Smoot, aged 17, born in Kentucky. He died July 22, 1872. 


104


THADDEUS NORRIS SMOOT8
(17-- - 1849)
Thaddeus Norris Smoot, son of Thomas and Elizabeth (Hett) Smoot, was 
born in Fauquier County, Virginia. On April 23, 1845, he secured license 
in that county to marry Mildred Jeffries, born 1820 in Virginia. To this 
union the following children were born--James, born 1836; Hannah, born 
1847; and Georgianna, born 1848. Thaddeus Smoot died intestate in 
Fauquier County, when in 1849 letters of administration were issued to 
George W. McQueen. His widow in 1850 was residing in Rappahannock 
County, and there she married Richard Welch, according to license, on 
October 13, 1851. 


ISAAC NEWTON SMOOT, C. S. A.8
Isaac Newton Smoot, son of Josias and Harriet (Whitacre) Smoot, was 
born about 1844 in Missouri. During the War Between the States, true to 
his Southern lineage, he served as a private in Company C, First 
Northeast Missouri Cavalry, C. S. A., the same regiment wherein several 
of his brothers served. During June 1876, he married Alma Walker, born 
1857. He maintained his residence for a time at La Belle, Missouri, but 
eventually settled at Denver, Colorado, where he died. 


Children of Isaac and Alma (Walker) Smoot
1. Lottie Smoot, died 1931, married ---- Holt, and Elmer Johnson. 
2. Anna Sue Smoot, died young. 
3. Lucy Smoot, died young. 
4. Edgar Everett Smoot, born Aug. 18, 1884, La Belle, Mo., married 
Mar. 5, 1915, Eva, born Oct. 9, 1892, at Curtis, Nebr., dau. of 
Arthur Mason and Mary A. (Peale) Johnson. Issues: Arthur 
Newton, born Dec. 29, 1915. 


RICHMOND KELLY SMOOT8
Richmond Kelly Smoot, son of John N. Smoot, was born 1836 in Carroll 
County, Tennessee. On February 1, 1866, he married Sarah Jane, 
daughter of Judge Asher W. Graham, of Bowling Green, Kentucky. He 
later settled in Austin, Texas, and there he died. His son, Lawrence 
Kelly, of Austin, on June 17, 1918, married Julia Emma Williams, of 
Maysfield, Texas, but of South Carolina lineage. To this union was born 
a daughter--Jane, on December 13, 1919. 

105


LIEUTENANT WARNER GREEN SMOOT, U. S. A.9
(1833 - 1918)
Warner Green Smoot, son of William Payne and Elizabeth (Jett) Smoot, 
was born August 28, 1833, in Daviess County, Indiana. At the beginning 
of the Civil War he enlisted first in Co. C of the 6th Indiana Volunteer 
Infantry. Later he was commissioned a First Lieutenant and served in Co. 
D of the 80th Regiment of Indiana Infantry. Upon his return from 
service, he married on July 24, 1864, Lydia E. Robinson, born December 
2, 1844. She died on December 9, 1910; he died November 16, 1918. 


Children of Warner and Lydia (Robinson) Smoot
1. Walter Glide Smoot. 
2. Emma Jane Smoot. 
3. Richard Bruner Smoot. 
4. Mary Della Smoot. 
5. Edwin Robinson Smoot married Lura Wall. q.v. 


EDWIN ROBINSON SMOOT10
Edwin Robinson Smoot, son of Warner and Lydia (Robinson) Smoot, 
was born in Washington, Indiana. On September 3, 1907, at Greenwood, 
Mississippi, he married Lura, daughter of John Archelaus and Anna 
Ardelia (Aven) Wall. 


Children of Edwin and Lura (Wall) Smoot
1. Warner Green Smoot, born Aug. 18, 1908, planter, cotton buyer, 
and manager of Shelby Hardware & Lumber Co., Shelby, Miss. 
2. Anna Aven Smoot, born Sept. 20, 1913, married June 3, 1934, Hal 
Lochridge Carnes, large cotton planter of the Mississippi Delta. 
Issue: Hal Lochridge, Jr., born Apr. 24, 1935. 
Edwin Robinson Smoot was graduated from the Mulliken University at 
Lincoln, Illinois, after which he devoted himself to evangelistic work of 
the church. For thirty years or more he has been a force in the Methodist 
Episcopal Church South, with charges at Corinth, Greenville, and other 
places in Mississippi. He is also prominent in the Masonic orders, being a 
Knight Templar, Scottish Rite Mason, Shriner, and at one time Chaplain 
of the Grand Lodge of the Grand Jurisdiction of Mississippi. In politics 
he is affiliated with the Republican Party. His residence is at Shelby, 
Mississippi. 


106


CHARLES SMOOT4
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
Charles Smoot, son of Thomas and Elizabeth (Barton) Smoot, was born 
in the year 1700 at the parental homestead on the Wicomico. He was 
orphaned when he was not more than five years of age and, according to 
the will of his father, he was placed under the guardianship of his 
maternal uncle, Colonel William Barton, of Prince Georges County. 
Colonel Barton died within the same year as that of Thomas Smoot, and 
by a codicil to his will he mentioned the land left Charles by his father 
Thomas. 
Charles Smoot married thrice, his first wife being Elizabeth, the daughter 
of Thomas and Martha (Sansbury) Harris. 


Children of Charles and Elizabeth (Harris) Smoot
1. Elizabeth Smoot married Henry Smith Hawkins. 
Well advanced in his thirties Charles Smoot married secondly Mary, 
daughter of Randolph and Anne Brandt, who was also the step-daughter 
of Barton, his brother. Circumstances also seem to indicate that Mary had 
been the second wife but childless widow of ---- Goodrick. 


Children of Charles and Mary (Brandt) Smoot
1. Henley Smoot married Eleanor Briscoe. q.v. 
2. John Nathan Smoot married twice. q.v. 
3. William Barton Smoot married Elizabeth Hanson. q.v. 
4. Mary Smoot married July 16, 1782, William, born Sept. 23, 1740, 
died Jan. 19, 1809, son of William and Barbara (Acton) McPherson. 
Issues: Elizabeth, born Apr. 15, 1783; Henry Hendley, born 
1786; Thomas; William; Mary; and Harriot. 
Shortly after the marriage of his eldest daughter, Elizabeth to Henry 
Smith Hawkins, Charles Smoot deeded to them the tract called "Daniel's 
Mount" for natural love and affections. The conveyance was recorded in 
Charles County on August 11, 1750, with Mary Smoot, wife, 
relinquishing her interest. 
A warrant was issued to him in 1761 for 130 acres of land in Charles 
County to be known as "Chance Enlarged", which seems to be the only 
record of a land patent in his name. 
His second wife died prior to June 21, 1766. The fact that she maintained 
a separate estate and that Charles Smoot, the widower, was 


107

appointed administrator by the court is proof that she had a life interest in 
the property. The inventory papers were filed on September 16, 1767, 
with an appraisement of œ452/8/4, with William Courts and James 
Maddox as the sureties. Distribution was made on October 11, 1768, to 
the following representatives, no relationship stated--Ignatius Middleton, 
William Stone, Charles Sewell, Frances Goodrick, and the heirs of 
Edward Goodrick deceased. It is assumed that they were her step-
children or their husbands who claimed their father's estate upon the 
death of his widow. 
Charles Smoot took for a third wife his cousin Elizabeth, the daughter of 
William and Rachel Barton, but successively the widow of Henry 
Brawner and Aaron Nalley. She had married her first husband on January 
2, 1726/7, in Rock Creek Parish, of Prince Georges County. He died 
prior to 1749, leaving six children. The following have been proved--
William, Barton, and Henry. By her second husband she became the 
mother of four sons--John, Aaron, Richard, and Nathan Barton. To the 
latter chidren she deeded on March 26, 1767, her personal estate but 
reserved it to her use during life and that of Charles Smoot "providing 
that the said Charles Smoot should marry me in six months". Two days 
later she deeded "Wentworth Woodhouse" to her three Brawner sons 
"providing if Charles Smoot should marry me honourably in six months". 
At this date most assuredly a courtship was in progress. 
The will of Charles Smoot was dated November 25, 1776, and proved in 
Charles County on March 20, 1778. He divided his estate among his wife 
Elizabeth and four children--Mary, John Nathan, Hendley, and William 
Barton. The inventory of the personal effects was taken on June 27, 
1778, with William Barton Smoot as the acting executor, and John N. 
Smoot and Hendley Smoot, signing as the kinsmen. 


ENSIGN HENDLEY SMOOT5
(1740 - 1811)
Hendley Smoot, son of Charles and Mary (Brandt) Smoot, was born 
about 1740 in Trinity Parish, Charles County. His dwelling-plantation lay 
in Newport Hundred where he brought his bride Eleanor, born September 
12, 1750, daughter of Hezekiah and Susannah (Wilson) Briscoe, and a 
descendant of Dr. John Briscoe who is reputed to have arrived in 
Maryland on the Ark with Leonard Calvert in 1634. 

108



Children of Henley and Eleanor (Briscoe) Smoot
1. Wilson Smoot married Anne ----. q.v. 
2. Catherine Smoot married Thomas Sellman. 
3. Anne Smoot married Smith Hawkins. 
4. Susannah Smoot married Richard Brooks Brandt and Thomas 
Solomon. 
5. Jane Smoot married James Lawrence. License Feb. 19, 1816, Anne 
Arundel Co., Md. 
6. Eleanor Smoot married John Iglehart. License Apr. 19, 1811, Anne 
Arundel Co., Md. 
7. Charles Smoot married Anne Egerton. q.v. 
8. Hezekiah Briscoe Smoot married Elizabeth ----. q.v. 
Henley Smoot like other members of his family voiced little sympathy 
for the mother country, and during the Revolution one finds him an 
ensign in the company of Captain John Parnham of the Twelfth Battalion 
of Charles County Militia.1 
The tax list of 1783 shows him seized of "Strife" of 105 acres, "Betty's 
Delight" 100 acres, "Noe's Desert" 35 acres, and "George's Hope", 76 
acres. Nine composed his immediate family, the same as reported at the 
official census of 1790. Through his wife he acquired an interest in 
"Morris Venture", originally patented by Richard Morris, which he with 
Richard Brandt and Margaret his wife conveyed to William Compton, 
Gent. 
Henley Smoot died intestate in Charles County during 1811. Letters of 
administration were issued to his eldest son Wilson, at which time 
Richard B. Brandt and William P. Ford offered bond. The inventory 
showed that his personal estate was appraised at $3,460. At a court 
hearing shortly afterwards the following were named as representatives--
Wilson Smoot, Thomas Sellman, Smith Hawkins, Richard Brook Brandt, 
Jane Smoot, John Iglehart, Charles Smoot, and Hezekiah Smoot. 
The final settlement was made on August 23, 1815, and showed 
disbursements to Thomas Solomon in right of his wife Susannah; the 
heirs of the Rev. Charles Smoot, i.e., Maria, Charles, George, James, 
Anne, and Hezekiah; the heirs of Hezekiah Smoot, i.e., James and 
Susannah; Smith Hawkins in right of his wife Anne; Jane Smoot; John 
Iglehart in right of his wife Eleanor; Catherine Smoot; and Wilson 
Smoot. 


1Archives vol. 21, p. 427. 


109



ENSIGN JOHN NATHAN SMOOT5
(1744 - 1815)
John Nathan Smoot, son of Charles and Mary (Brandt) Smoot, was born 
1744, according to a deposition of 1779, in Charles County, Maryland. 
He married twice, but the identity of his first wife has not been 
established. In his will he refers to "proportions of my estate and added 
to the shares of my children by my former wife", and speaking of his 
present wife he stated "of my children by her". His second wife, 
however, was Mary, born 1755, daughter of Hezekiah and Susannah 
(Wilson) Briscoe. 


Children of John Nathan Smoot
1. Charles Smoot married Lettie Stoddert ----. q.v. 
2. Elizabeth Smoot married Rev. John Weems. Issues: William, 
born Jan. 26, 1790; John Nathan, born Sept. 16, 1791; Walter H., 
born Apr. 9, 1794; James J., born Nov. 7, 1796; Charles Smoot, 
born Apr. 20, 1798; George M., born Sept. 16, 1801; Lock, born 
July 25, 1804; Sarah Anne, born July 11, 1808. 
3. Mary Smoot, d.s.p. 1843, named nephews John Weems, Francis 
Weems; niece Sarah Anne Hawkins; and Joseph Henry Hawkins, 
extr. 
4. Anne Smoot, d.s.p. 1841, named sisters Mary, Eleanor, Elizabeth; 
and children of sister Elizabeth Weems. 
5. Eleanor Smoot, d.s.p.; 1840, named sister Mary; Walter Weems; 
James Weems; Lock Weems; Elizabeth Anne Weems, dau. of 
Charles Weems; Josiah Henry Hawkins' two daus.; John and 
Francis Weems of John; and Mary, dau. of Walter Weems. 
6. Susanna Wilson Smoot, d.s.p. 1847, named brother William; 
nephews John Smoot, Wilson Compton Smoot, Richard Smoot, 
and Edward Smoot, sons of William; niece Anne Mary Smoot. 
7. Margaret Brandt Smoot, d.s.p. 1833, named sister Susannah; 
brother William; nephew John Weems. 
8. William Hendley Smoot married Violetta Compton. q.v. 
John Nathan Smoot established his seat in Newport West Hundred, 
where in 1783 he was a tax payer of an estate aggregating 292 acres--
"Calvert's Hope" and George's Rest", with six in family. It is said that 
John Nathan Smoot served as Quartermaster of the Lower Battalion of 
Charles County Militia during the Revolutionary War, perhaps the 
following notation refers to him: "That Captain George Keeports deliver 
to Ensign John Smoot of First Brigade 3 3/4 yds Cloth. 3 yds shallon, 
and 1 piece of Britaines of 3d Quality in part of the Articles".2 
The will of John Nathan Smoot was dated January 9, 1812, and proved 
January 21, 1815, in Charles County by William Barton Smoot, 
2Archives, vol. 43, p. 121. 



110

Walter H. Smoot, and William H. Smoot. He bequeathed his estate 
equally among the following named children--Charles, Elizabeth, Mary, 
Anne, Eleanor, Susannah, Margaret, and William--stating that the 
property devised them since leaving the parental dwelling should be 
deducted from their share of the total estate. He mentioned one-fourth of 
the landed estate due his wife Mary as heir of her father Hezekiah 
Briscoe, deceased. 
On May 24, 1820, John Weems and Elizabeth his wife, of Charles 
County, deeded to Mary Smoot portions of "George's Rest" and 
"Calvert's Hope" which Elizabeth Weems was entitled from the estate of 
her father John Nathan Smoot. 


WILLIAM BARTON SMOOT5
(1746 - 1822)
William Barton Smoot, son of Charles and Mary (Brandt) Smoot, was 
born about 1746 in the Wicomico District of Charles County, where his 
great-grandfather settled nearly 100 years before. He, however, left the 
immediate environs of his father's plantation and established his seat near 
the present hamlet of Newport in Trinity Parish where a number of the 
younger sons of the landed barons of the Wicomico settled when their 
patrimony did not entitle them to the ancestral seat. He engaged in the 
tanning trade, an occupation which proved the foundation for 
considerable affluence of the Smoots for a later day. 
He selected his wife from among the eligible daughters of Judge Walter 
Hanson and Elizabeth his wife, the daughter of William Hoskins. 


Children of William and Elizabeth (Hanson) Smoot
1. Letitia Hanson Smoot married Henry S. Hawkins. 
2. William Hoskins Smoot, d.s.p. 1831, naming young niece Elizabeth 
Eleanor Brerewood Hawkins dau. of "my" sister Letitia H. 
Hawkins; will witnessed by J. W. Smoot and Mary Briscoe. 
3. John Smoot, d.s.p. 1846, willing sister Letita H. Hawkins entire 
estate and mentioning niece Mrs. Sara Sides, of Balto. 
4. Walter Hanson Smoot. Pvt. Capt. Cox's Co., Hawkins' Regt., 
War of 1812. 
5. Hanson Smoot, born 1789, living alone 1850 in Chas. Co. 
6. Charles Smoot married Harriet Sothoron. q.v. 
7. ---- Smoot married ---- Briscoe. Issues: Mary Letitia and 
Elizabeth Eleanor. 


111


William Barton Smoot was active in the cause for independence and in 
1777 served as private then sergeant in the company of Captain Walter 
Hanson of the Twelfth Battalion of Charles County Militia.3 
The tax list for Charles County in 1783 shows him a resident of Newport 
Hundred seized of the following tracts--"Chance Enlarged" of 12 acres, 
"George's Rest" of 50 acres, "Bridges" 50 acres, "Hucklow's Addition" 
28 acres, and "Smoot's Venture" of 343 acres, the latter lying in Port 
Tobacco Hundred. 
In 1792 William Barton Smoot with John Chandler was a bondsman for 
Charity Keech when she administered on the estate of George Keech Sr. 
The will of William Barton Smoot was proved 1821 in Charles County 
by John T. Dyson, William H. Smoot, and Mary Muskett. Mary Letitia 
was bequeathed one-third of the dwelling-plantation and numerous 
slaves, while William and John received the residue. Walter Hanson was 
willed the land purchased from Robert Edelen, and Hanson the land 
where Edward Ford resided called "Bridges" and "Smoot's Triangle". 
Mary Letitia Briscoe and Elizabeth Eleanor Briscoe, grand-daughters, 
were devised personalty. 
The inventory on August 31, 1821, showed numerous tannery utensils. 
At the sale of his personal estate on November 23, 1823, among the 
buyers were William Hoskins Smoot, Hanson Smoot, Dr. Charles Smoot, 
Walter H. Smoot, Letitia H. Smoot, John Smoot, Charles Smoot, and 
Walter Smoot Hoskins. 
On August 4, 1825, Letitia Hanson Smoot, William Hoskins Smoot, and 
John Smoot conveyed the following tracts--"Chance Enlarged", 
"Brother", "Boarman's Hazard", and "George's Rest"--beginning at 
Zachia Swamp, all of which had been deeded to their father, William 
Barton Smoot, by Samuel Chapman. 


CAPTAIN WILSON SMOOT6
(17-- - 1823)
Wilson Smoot, son of Henley and Eleanor (Briscoe) Smoot, was born in 
Trinity Parish, Charles County. Sometime after 1790 he married Anne 
----, but it is believed that no issues survived. At the death of his 
brother, the Rev. Charles Smoot, in 1805, Wilson Smoot and his brother-
in-law Richard Brandt became guardians of the former's minor children. 
On July 22, 1808, Wilson Smoot and Anne his wife conveyed to Henry 
Green Jr., "Griffen Hope" and "Addition to Griffen 
3Unpublished Maryland Records, vol. 2, pp. 296, 300. 

112

Hope". During the War of 1812 he served as captain in the 43rd 
Maryland Regiment. He died intestate during 1823. The inventory of his 
personal estate was filed on October 24, 1823, with his widow Anne 
Smoot as administratrix. 
The will of Anne Smoot, his widow, was dated February 8, 1830, and 
proved in Charles County on March 15, 1830, by Barton Robey, Charles 
Wells, and Henry H. Bean. She devised her sister Mary property during 
life then to sister's Spalding's children ... "if by any change of 
circumstances Mr. Hargraves' sons, James and Richard, become equally 
indigent with the indigent of my sister Spaldings' children ... then they 
shall share equally". 


REV. CHARLES SMOOT6
(1771 - 1805)
Charles Smoot, son of Hendley and Eleanor (Briscoe) Smoot, was born 
1771 in Trinity Parish, Charles County. He was the first member of the 
Smoot family to accept holy orders, being ordained a priest of the 
American Episcopal Church in 1793. His most memorial charge was 
King and Queen Parish of St. Mary's County, with the parish church 
located at Old St. Mary's City where his maternal ancestor, Dr. John 
Briscoe, first settled nearly two hundred years before. 
On December 14, 1795, he secured license in St. Mary's County to marry 
Anne, born December 25, 1771, daughter of Charles Calvert and Mary 
Egerton, and a kinswoman of Lord Baltimore. 


Children of Charles and Anne (Egerton) Smoot
1. Maria Wilson Smoot, born July 10, 1797, married ---- Handy. 
Issues: George; Hezekiah; Charles; Richard; and Caroline. 
2. Charles Calvert Smoot married Sarah Bryan. q.v. 
3. Daniel Lawrence Smoot, died young. 
4. George Henley Smoot married twice. q.v. 
5. James Egerton Smoot married Phoebe Cavally Lowe. q.v. 
6. Anne Caroline Smoot, born May 24, 1804, married Jan. 8, 1828, 
Richard Henley Brandt. 
7. Hezekiah Briscoe Smoot married Harriet McNeale. q.v. 
8. Briscoe Smoot, died young. 
Charles Smoot died in St. Mary's County in 1805. His widow in 1809 
shared in the distribution of the estate of Bennett Egerton whose mother 
was Mary Jones. Anne Smoot died in the spring of 1810, and was buried 
in the churchyard at Old St. Mary's. Her tomb states that she died in the 
thirty-ninth year of her age. 

113

In 1815 the six surviving orphans received their inheritance from the 
estate of their paternal grandfather. The estate of their father was not 
settled until August 8, 1822, in St. Mary's County, when $574.62 1/2 was 
awarded each child. 


HEZEKIAH SMOOT6
Hezekiah Smoot, son of Henley and Eleanor (Briscoe) Smoot, was born 
at the parental estate in Charles County, Maryland. After the Revolution 
he settled in Fairfax County, Virginia, where the following declaration is 
on file: 
"I Hezekiah Smoot do swear that my Removal into the State of Virginia 
was with no intent of evading the Laws for preventing the further 
importation of slaves, nor have I brought with me any slaves with an 
intention of selling them nor have any of the slaves which I brought with 
me been imported from Africa or any of the West India Islands since the 
first day of November 1778." 
(signed) Hzeh Smoot. 
The wife of Hezekiah Smoot has not been established through research, 
nor the date of his death. He predeceased his father, however, for the 
former's two children shared in the estate of their grandfather in 1811. 


Children of Hezekiah Smoot
1. James Henley Smoot married Barbara Anne ----. q.v. 
2. Susannah Wilson Smoot. 


DR. CHARLES SMOOT6
(1770 - 18--)
Charles Smoot, son of John Nathan Smoot, was born about 1770 in 
Trinity Parish, Charles County, Maryland. His wife when she 
relinquished her dower in a piece of realty signed her name as Letty 
Stoddert Smoot. A secondary source, however, states that she was Lettie 
Dent Tyler, the daughter of William Tyler, of Prince Georges County, 
Maryland. Her signature somehow reputes the statement, practically the 
middle name. It is traditional that a sister of Benjamin Stoddert, first 
Secretary of the Navy, married a Smoot, but this belief has not been 
proved by court records. It was not customary in the early nineteenth 
century for married women to use their maiden names with that of 
Page 114

their husband, and therefore it is not believed that she was the traditional 
sister of the Secretary. 
A correct list of their children has not been established, the following are 
inferred from the census records. 


Children of Charles and Letty Smoot
1. John Nathan Smoot, born about 1808. 
2. Elizabeth Smoot, born 1813, married Frank Killough. 
3. Mary Smoot, born 1813. 
4. Charles Smoot, born 1820. 
5. Anne Hinson Smoot married Dr. James Greenfield Smith, born 
1799 in Md. 
Charles Smoot married prior to 1800, for the census for that year shows 
him the head of a family in Charles County, with a daughter less than ten 
years of age. 
On October 12, 1815, Charles Smoot "Sr.", of Charles County, deeded 
land to William Henley Smoot, at which time his wife waived her third. 
Sometime after this date he with a number of other Maryland families 
migrated to Hickman County, Tennessee, and settled on the east side of 
Lick Creek just above the mouth of Fort Cooper Hollow. A nearby 
neighbor was David Killough, formerly of Pennsylvania, whose son 
married a daughter of Charles Smoot. 
A history of Hickman County states that the Maryland settlers were of 
the highest types, many of them embracing the learned professions. 
Among the families enumerated were the Tyler, Weems, Semmes, 
Clagett, and Smith families. Charles Smoot was a doctor of medicine, 
while a member of the Semmes family was an attorney-at-law. 
The first available census of Hickman County (1820) shows David 
Killough, Walter Tyler, and Horatio Clagett as neighbors of Dr. Smoot. 
The latter died before 1840, inasmuch as in that year his widow, Lettie 
Smoot, was the head of a family, with two maidens and a youth. She, 
however, was not a resident of the county in 1850. In that year Elizabeth 
Killough was the head of a family with realty assessed at $700, and with 
her were Mary Smoot, Agnes Smoot, and Walter Smith. Nearby lived 
Charles Smoot, a farmer, with realty valued at $300, and Sophia Smoot, 
born 1827 in Tennessee. It is not known whether Sophia was a wife or 
sister. No children, however, composed the household. 
The destruction of all records by fire in Hickman County during 1865 
prevented any research in this county to ascertain further information on 
this family. 

115



LIEUTENANT WILLIAM HENDLEY SMOOT6
(1790 - 1853)
William Hendley Smoot, son of John Nathan and Mary (Briscoe) Smoot, 
was born 1790 in Trinity Parish, Charles County. During the War of 
1812 he served first as a private in Captain John P. Parnham's Company, 
First Maryland Regiment, commanded by Colonel Hawkins. He was 
ordered into active service in July 1814, and was stationed in St. Mary's 
County. Later he was commissioned a lieutenant and served under 
Captain Dent. 
On February 19, 1824, he married in Trinity Parish, by the Rev. Richard 
H. B. Mitchell, an Episcopal clergyman, Violetta Wilson, born April 18, 
1803, daughter of John Walter and Elizabeth Anne (Penn) Compton. 


Children of William and Violetta (Compton) Smoot
1. John Nathan Smoot. 
2. Anne Mary Smoot, born 1826. 
3. Elizabeth Smoot, born 1827. 
4. Wilson Compton Smoot, born 1831. 
5. Richard Smoot married Mary Brawner. q.v. 
6. Edward Maguder Linthicum Smoot, born July 4, 1838, died Oct. 
10, 1886, married Mary Frances Gray and Caroline Middleton 
Ward. 
7. Lucinda Smoot, born Nov. 25, 1841. 
In 1850 William Hendley Smoot was established on his estate, appraised 
at $6,000, in Allen's Fresh District, of Charles County. 
He died March 14, 1853. His will was dated March 12, 1853, and proved 
May 17, 1853, in Charles County, by Josiah H. Hawkins, Strouton W. 
Dent, and A. J. Smoot. He willed his entire estate to his unnamed 
children after the death of their mother. 
In 1878, his widow Violetta W. Smoot applied for a Government pension 
by right of her husband's services in the War of 1812. Her marriage was 
certified by Jonathan T. Padgett, Joseph Lacey, Richard M. Smoot, and 
Anne M. Smoot. Strouton W. Dent stated that he had known Violetta 
Smoot for 55 years. She died, however, before the approval of her 
application. Letters of administration were issued on March 4, 1879, to 
Richard M. Smoot, of Charles County. Affidavits showed that in 1878 
Edward L. Smoot was a magistrate of Charles County. 


116



DR. CHARLES SMOOT6
(17-- - 182-)
Charles Smoot, son of William and Elizabeth Hoskins (Hanson) Smoot, 
was born in Charles County, Maryland. On June 11, 1799, in St. Mary's 
County, he secured license to marry Harriet Sothoron. The following list 
of children may not be complete; the names were recalled by a 
granddaughter of Dr. Smoot, living in Washington in 1936. 


Children of Charles and Harriet (Sothoron) Smoot
1. Maria Smoot. 
2. Adeline Smoot. 
3. William Smoot married Rachel ----. Issues: Georgie and Maria. 
4. Robert Wood Smoot married Margaret White. Issues: Stephen; 
Charles; Robert; Henry; Daniel; Benjamin; Julia; and Harriet. 
5. Gideon Smoot. 
6. John Henry Smoot married twice. q.v. 
7. Charles Smoot. 
8. George Smoot. 
9. Arthur Smoot. 
Dr. Smoot died intestate in Charles County sometime after 1820. His 
widow died several years later in Georgetown. The following appeared in 
one of the Capital's newspapers--"Mrs. Harriet Smoot, widow of Dr. 
Charles Smoot, died in Georgetown, August 31, 1842, aged 57". 
Perhaps the "George Smoot of Charles" whose estate was administered in 
Charles County by Mary Smoot on October 13, 1829, was of this line. 


CHARLES CALVERT SMOOT7
(1798 - 1867)
Charles Calvert Smoot, son of Charles and Anne (Egerton) Smoot, was 
born September 20, 1798, in St. Mary's County, Maryland. He settled 
later in Alexandria, Virginia, where he married Sarah Waters Bryan. 


Children of Charles and Sarah (Bryan) Smoot
1. Mary Anne Smoot married John Perry. 
2. Susan Adelaide Smoot. 
3. Catherine Florence Smoot. 
4. Charles Calvert Smoot married Susannah Smoot. q.v. 
5. John Bryan Smoot married twice. q.v. 
Charles Calvert Smoot removed to Alexandria, Virginia, where his will, 
dated February 16, 1858, was proved on October 7, 1867. He named his 
daughters Mary Anne Perry wife of John, Susan Adelaide Smoot, 
Catherine Florence Smoot, and sons Charles C. and John B. Smoot. 


117



GEORGE HENDLEY SMOOT7
(1801 - 1870)
George Hendley Smoot, son of Charles and Anne (Egerton) Smoot, was 
born April 10, 1801, in St. Mary's County. About 1815 he settled at 
Alexandria, Virginia, and later married Mary, daughter of William 
Weston. After her death he married Catherine, daughter of John A. 
Uhler, one-time of Philadelphia. He died testate on March 11, 1870, in 
Alexandria, Virginia. 


Children of George Hendley Smoot
1. Mary Egerton Smoot married David Milton French. 
2. Josiah Hewes Davis Smoot, born 1831, died 1888, married 1853 
Frances Piper French (1834-1905). 
3. Catherine Uhler Smoot married Maris Taylor. 
4. Alleghany Smoot married Susan Miller. 


JAMES EGERTON SMOOT7
(1803 - 1849)
James Egerton Smoot, son of Charles and Anne (Egerton) Smoot, was 
born April 26, 1803, in St. Mary's County, Maryland. In his late youth he 
settled in Alexandria, where his brother, George Hendley, deeded him a 
house and lot for the consideration of $750. On March 13, 1828, he 
married Phoebe Cavally, born December 25, 1805, daughter of James 
Rector Magruder and Christiana (Arell) Lowe. 


Children James Egerton and Phoebe (Lowe) Smoot
1. James Rector Smoot, born Mar. 27, 1830, died Nov. 3, 1902, married 
Frances Virginia, born Nov. 3, 1832, died May 20, 1863, dau. of 
A. R. and P. Fraser, and married secondly Harriett Lee, born 
Mar. 19, 1833, died June 30, 1870, dau. of Charles L. and Selina 
Powell. 
2. Christiana A. Smoot, born Feb. 8, 1832, died May 25, 1880, married 
John Jolly. 
3. Jacob Douglas Smoot, born 1834, died 1838. 4. Laura Egerton Smoot. 
5. Phebe Anne Smoot, born 1838, died 1842. 
6. William Albert Smoot, married twice. q.v. 
7. Anne C. Smoot. 
8. Ida Virginia Smoot. 
James Egerton Smoot died June 19, 1849, intestate in Fairfax County, 
Virginia. His widow was named administratrix and the guardian of the 
minor children. She died at Alexandria July 25, 1867, aged 61 years. 


118



HEZEKIAH BRISCOE SMOOT7
(1805 - 18--)
Hezekiah Briscoe Smoot, son of Charles and Anne (Egerton) Smoot, was 
born June 22, 1805, in St. Mary's County, Maryland. His youth was 
spent, however, in Charles County, and in young manhood he joined his 
brothers at Alexandria, Virginia. He married Harriet E. McNeal, of St. 
Mary's County, and sister of Andrew McNeal, later of Baltimore, and of 
Scotch Presbyterian lineage. Hezekiah Briscoe died at his seat near 
Alexandria. 


Children of Hezekiah Briscoe and Harriet (McNeal) Smoot
1. Susan Smoot, born May 26, 1827, married Charles C. Smoot, q.v. 
2. James Richard Smoot married Anna G. Crittenden. q.v. 
3. Charles Smoot. 
4. Maria Smoot. 
5. Daniel J. Smoot. 
6. Briscoe Smoot. 
7. David L. Smoot, born 1835, Capt., C. S. A., settled in California, 
1876. 


JAMES HENLEY SMOOT7
It is not known whether James Henley Smoot, son of Hezekiah, was born 
in Maryland or Virginia, but his youth, however, was spent at his father's 
home in Alexandria, Virginia. On April 16, 1823, as a resident of 
Alexandria, he deeded to Dr. Edward Briscoe, of Charles County, a lot 
on Pennsylvania Avenue in the National Capital containing a 3-story 
brick dwelling for $100. His wife Barbara Anne Smoot waived her 
dower. Shortly after this date he migrated to Shenandoah County, 
Virginia, where on November 24, 1823, as one of the representatives of 
Willson Smoot, he acknowledged his indebtedness to James Douglas and 
Jacob Douglas, of Alexandria, and thereby conveyed property to 
Nicholas Stonestreet. 


RICHARD M. SMOOT7
(1833 - 1906)
Richard M. Smoot, son of William and Violetta (Compton) Smoot, was 
born about 1833 in Charles County, Maryland. On April 21, 1857, he 
married Mary E. Brawner. 


Children of Richard and Mary (Brawner) Smoot
1. James William Smoot, born May 26, 1858, died Nov. 19, 1880. 
2. Violetta Cordelia Smoot, born May 15, 1860, died Mar. 21, 1913, 
married June 9, 1884, George W. Cross. 

119


In 1860 Richard Smoot was the head of his household in Newport 
District of Charles County, with realty appraised at $5,000 and a personal 
estate of $15,000. In addition to his wife and two children, there were in 
his home his widowed mother and his spinster sister, Lucy. His wife died 
January 2, 1904; he died May 8, 1906. 


JOHN HENRY SMOOT7
(1820 - 1891)
John Henry Smoot, son of Charles and Harriet (Sothoron) Smoot, was 
born about 1820 in Charles County, Maryland. His wife was Sarah 
Morton, but the register of Trinity Parish records his marriage to 
Margaret E. Morton on November 20, 1845. 


Children of John and Sarah (Morton) Smoot
1. John D. Smoot, born 1851, died Nov. 23, 1885, married ---- 
Goldsborough. 
His wife died and was interred in his burial lot in Oak Hill Cemetery, 
Washington, on June 5, 1866. He married secondly Julia Belt, but no 
issues resulted from this union. He was a prosperous merchant of 
Georgetown and maintained his home on N Street, now known as the old 
Smoot House, made famous as the residence of Newton D. Baker when 
he was Secretary of War in Wilson's Cabinet. John Henry Smoot lived 
until 1891. 


CHARLES CALVERT SMOOT8
(1826 - 1884)
Charles Calvert Smoot, son of Charles and Sarah (Bryan) Smoot, was 
born 1826 in Alexandria, Virginia. He married, according to license 
issued in Alexandria on October 3, 1854, his cousin Susannah, the 
daughter of Hezekiah Smoot. During the Civil War the tanning factory of 
Charles Smoot was an important source of supply to the Confederate 
Government. He died during 1884. 


Children of Charles and Susannah (Smoot) Smoot
1. James Clinton Smoot married Frances Elizabeth Wood. q.v. 
2. Cora Smoot. 
3. Loula Smoot. 
4. Florence Smoot married Robert Wilson Wheat. Issue: Robert 
Wheat. 
5. Sue Ella Smoot married Alfred Thomson. Issue: Susan Smoot. 
6. Ella H. Smoot, died young. 
7. Sarah Lee Smoot, died young. 
8. Bertie Smoot, died young. 

120


JOHN BRYAN SMOOT8
(1830 - 1887)
John Bryan Smoot, son of Charles Calvert and Sarah (Bryan) Smoot, was 
born July 31, 1830, in Virginia. In Dorchester County, Maryland, on 
October 16, 1855, he secured license to marry Sarah A. Breerwood, who 
died in 1863. From a deed, however, in Rappahannock County, it shows 
that he married secondly Emilie E. ----. He died 1887. 


Children of John and Sarah (Breerwood) Smoot
1. Henry Smoot. 
2. William Breerwood Smoot, born Jan. 1, 1858, married Oct. 13, 
1886, Margaret Le Compte Cator. 


WILLIAM ALBERT SMOOT, C. S. A.8
(1840 - 1917)
William Albert Smoot, son of James Egerton and Phoebe (Lowe) Smoot, 
was born August 30, 1840, in Alexandria, Virginia. During the War 
Between the States he served for one year in the ranks of Company A, 
17th Regiment of Virginia Infantry, and then with Company H, 4th 
Virginia Cavalry, sustaining seven wounds during the conflict. 
On April 24, 1866, he married Elizabeth Edmonds, daughter of John H. 
and Elizabeth (Edmonds) Parrott. 


Children of William and Elizabeth (Parrott) Smoot
1. Elizabeth Smoot married ---- Fuller. 
His wife died August 30, 1869, and on October 15, 1873, he married 
Elizabeth Carter, daughter of the Rev. William and Marietta McQuire. 
He died during 1917. 


Children of William and Elizabeth (McQuire) Smoot
2. William McGuire Smoot. 
3. Lewis Egerton Smoot. 
4. William Albert Smoot. 


MAJOR JAMES RICHARD SMOOT, C. S. A.8
(1828 - 1907)
James Richard Smoot, son of Hezekiah Briscoe and Harriet (McNeal) 
Smoot, was born January 17, 1828, at Alexandria, Virginia. Until the 
Civil War he was engaged in the meat packing industry, and was one of 
the most prosperous bachelors in the once-important river 


121

port of Alexandria. When Virginia cast her lot with the Confederacy, 
James Richard Smoot offered his services to the South and was 
commissioned a major and assigned to the commissary department. He 
served throughout the conflict and at the end he bade farewell to his 
fellow officers in 1865 at Gordonsville, Virginia. 
While on furlough sometime in 1862 he was visiting his aunt, Carolina 
Brandt, formerly of Alexandria but then residing on a plantation in 
Culpeper County. At that time he met Anna, the daughter of William 
Crittenden, a neighboring planter, formerly of Kentucky, who had 
married Catherine Hudson and settled in Culpeper, the family home of 
his wife. They were married on May 27, 1863, the license having been 
obtained five days previously at Culpeper Courthouse. 
His business in Alexandria ruined and his private fortune lost at the end 
of the war, he was practically penniless when he laid away his gray 
uniform. A brother officer of the Confederate Army had forty dollars in 
gold, and with a generous spirit he offered him half of his worldly goods. 
So with twenty dollars James Richard and his wife and baby boy settled 
in Culpeper County, where the former soldier began to rehabilitate 
himself. After an adventurous life Major Smoot died at his seat in 
Culpeper County, during May 1907 at the age of 89 years. He was 
survived by his three children, a son and twin daughters having died in 
infancy. 


Children of James Richard and Anna (Crittenden) Smoot
1. William Briscoe Smoot, born May 8, 1864, married twice. q.v. 
2. Susan Cornelia Smoot, born Feb. 4, 1866, married May 27, 1885, 
Waller J. Yager. Issues: James Richard; C. Edward; Julia 
Ada; Thomas T.; Ellie Hutt; Margaret; and Briscoe Smoot. 
3. Charles D. Smoot, born Apr. 18, 1873, married Effie F. Lewis. q.v. 


JAMES CLINTON SMOOT9
James Clinton Smoot, son of Charles and Susannah (Smoot) Smoot, was 
born in Alexandria, Virginia. He married Frances Elizabeth Wood, and in 
1896 he settled at North Wilkesboro, Wilkes County, North Carolina. 
There he established a tannery, in keeping with the hereditary occupation 
of his line. 


Chlidren of James and Elizabeth (Wood) Smoot
1. Ida M. Smoot, died young. 
2. Charles Calvert Smoot married Rebecca Lloyd Uhler. Issues: 
Rebecca Lloyd; Frank Wood; Charles Calvert; and Catherine 
Griffith. 

122

3. Sibyl Harriet Smoot married Edward Gordon Finley. Issues: 
Julia Gwynn; Edward Smoot; and Robert Wood. 
4. Frances Egerton Smoot married Ralston Murphy, son of Ambrose 
Merryman and Frances (Carey) Pound. Issues: Ralston Murphy; 
Frances Smoot; Carey; and James Egerton. 
5. James Clinton Smoot married first Mary Sheppard and secondly 
Pauline Austin Jennings. 


WILLIAM BRISCOE SMOOT9
William Briscoe Smoot, son of James Richard and Anna (Crittenden) 
Smoot, was born May 8, 1864, in Virginia. On July 6, 1892, he married 
Lucy E. Lewis, daughter of James Ballard and Sallie (Ross) Lewis. She 
died on September 6, 1920, and on May 2, 1922, he wedded Sallie B. 
Bricker, widow. He maintains his seat near Culpeper Courthouse, 
Virginia. 


Children of Briscoe and Lucy (Lewis) Smoot
1. Harriet E. Smoot, born Nov. 22, 1893, married Apr. 12, 1916, R. F. 
Lee. Issues: Robert W.; Anna; Edwin J.; Charles D.; Gordon 
Briscoe; Fitzhugh; Thomas C.; Virginia; and Clinton Smoot. 


CHARLES D. SMOOT9
Charles D. Smoot, son of James Richard and Anna (Crittenden) Smoot, 
was born April 18, 1873, in Culpeper County, Virginia. On November 
29, 1905, he married Effie F., the daughter of James Ballard and Sallie 
(Ross) Lewis. Three daughters were born--Roselle, Sarah, and Ellen. He 
maintained his estate at Mitchells in southern Culpeper County. 


123



WILLIAM SMOOT4
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
William Smoot, son of Thomas and Elizabeth (Barton) Smoot, was born 
in William and Mary Parish, Charles County, Maryland, towards the 
latter part of the seventeenth century, being a minor at the death of his 
father in 1704. He received 200 acres of unnamed land by the will of his 
parent, but somehow at his death his estate seemed to have consisted 
chiefly of personal property. The name of his wife is unknown. 


Children of William Smoot
1. Thomas Smoot, no further record. 
2. John Smoot married Mary ----. q.v. 
The will of William Smoot was dated November 9, 1726, and proved in 
Charles County November 18, 1726, by Thomas Morris, Elizabeth 
Weedon, and Thomas Hawton. He bequeathed his son Thomas 
personalty at the age of 21 years and placed him under the guardianship 
of Mark Penn, naming the latter as the executor of his estate. To his son 
John, he devised personalty at the age of 21, and placed him under the 
guardianship of John Wilder. 
The inventory of his personal estate was taken on March 15, 1726/27, 
and appraised at œ30/13/7 by William Hawton and Robert Yates. 
William Barton and Thomas Smoot signed as the nearest of kin, and 
Thomas Smoot as the greatest creditor. 
Prior to the inventory, however, his will was presented to the court on 
November 19, 1726, by Mark Penn as the executor, and Matthew Dutton 
and William Cage as his sureties. 


JOHN SMOOT5
(17-- - 1747)
John Smoot, born about 1712, was a minor at the death of his father 
William Smoot in 1726, and according to the terms of his parent's will, 
he was placed under the guardianship of John Wilder. The father of the 
boy apparently lost his land early in life and inasmuch as his inheritance 
was small, John Smoot at majority moved westward to the frontier of 

124

the Province where land warrants were freely granted to encourage 
settlement. 
His migration can best be placed at 1730 and therefore he was one of the 
pioneers of what is now Montgomery County. In 1732 he patented 
"Bell's Design" of 100 acres, and in the same year with J. Collier and J. 
Holmard he patented "Partnership" consisting of 50 acres, and then 
"Elizabeth" of 50 acres--all three tracts then lying in Prince George 
County. He married Mary ----, whom he perhaps met on the frontier. 


Children of John and Mary Smoot
1. John Smoot. q.v. 
2. Edward Smoot, in 1768 a resident of Craven Co., S. C., sold 
"Crumford", lying on west side of Seneca Creek to Joseph Ward, 
of A. A. Co. 
3. Mary Smoot. 
4. Barton Smoot, posthumous. 
John Smoot with Thomas Charter was bondsman when Mary Snow, of 
Prince Georges County, administered on the estate of John Snow. On 
March 20, 1738, John Smoot conveyed "Partnership" and "Elizabeth", 
that is, his share in the two tracts, to James Holmead. At that time no 
wife waived her dower. John Beale and John Hepburn witnessed the 
conveyance. 
The will of John Smoot was dated October 20, 1747, and admitted to 
probate in Prince Georges County by Solomon Stimton, James Harrison, 
and Thomas Birdwistle. He devised his son John 100 acres of "Beall's 
Design", his son Edward 100 acres of "Crumford", and various 
personalty to his wife Mary and his daughter Mary. 
The inventory of his personal effects was taken on June 28, 1748, with 
Jeremiah Neal and Matthew Edwards signing as kinsmen, presumably his 
widow's relatives or husbands of unproved sisters, as it is believed that he 
had no blood kinsmen living at that time in the western part of the 
Province. His widow signed the papers as executrix, with John Crompkin 
and James Harrison as her sureties. 
His widow later married Thomas Fletshall who rendered an account on 
the estate during 1752 in Frederick County. At the June Court of 1755 
John Smoot Jr. petitioned the court stating that Thomas Fletchell had the 
estate of Edward and Barton Smoot in his hands and "is now going to 
move to Carolina", therefore prayed partition of the estate on behalf of 
the two orphans. 


125



JOHN SMOOT6
(17-- - 1808)
John Smoot, eldest son of John and Mary Smoot, was born in Prince 
Georges (Montgomery) County, Maryland, about 1738, or perhaps a little 
earlier as he was of sufficient age in 1755 to petition the court for a 
division of his father's estate. In 1753 he sold to his step-father Thomas 
Fletcher (the spelling occurred in various ways on the records) "Beal's 
Design" for 3,000 pounds of tobacco. The tract adjoined "Conclusion" 
and "Crumford". Shortly after he demanded the partition of his father's 
estate on behalf of his younger brothers, it is believed that he, with a 
party of other adventurers, migrated to what was then Orange County, 
later Hampshire County, Virginia. His will was dated December 11, 
1807, and proved in Hampshire County on April 18, 1808, naming the 
following children. 


Children of John Smoot
1. Barton Smoot. 
2. Solomon Smoot. q.v. 
3. William Smoot. 
4. Jacob G. Smoot married Catherine Shank. q.v. 
5. James Smoot. 
6. Joshua Smoot married Mary Haines q.v. 
7. Joseph Smoot. 
8. Nancy Smoot. 
9. Hironage Smoot. 
10. Susannah Smoot. 
11. Lucretia Smoot. 
12. Charity Smoot. 
13. Priscilla Smoot. 


SOLOMON SMOOT7
(17-- - 1828)
Solomon Smoot, son of John, of Hampshire County, Virginia, migrated 
to Harrison County, Indiana, where he died during the early part of 1828. 


Children of Solomon Smoot
1. Elizabeth Smoot. 
2. John Smoot married Elizabeth Hendershott. License Nov. 17, 1825, 
Harr. Co., Ind. 
3. Barton Smoot married Hannah Doney. License Dec. 31, 1829, 
Harr. Co., Ind. 
4. ---- Smoot married ---- Burke. 

126


The will of Solomon Smoot was dated February 20, 1828, and probated 
March 8, 1828, in Harrison County, by George W. Craner and Isaac 
Helms, with Henry Barricklow as the executor. He named his three 
children, Betsy, John, and Barton, and a grandson Solomon Burke. None 
of his children were heads of families in Harrison County at the 1830 
census. 


JACOB G. SMOOT7
(1790 - 1850)
Jacob G. Smoot, son of John, was born in Hampshire County, Virginia, 
about 1790. He migrated to Montgomery County, Ohio, and settled on 
Sugar Creek. He married Catherine Shank who at the census of 1850 
gave her age as 56 years and birthplace as Ohio. Eight children were born 
but only five matured. Jacob G. Smoot died April 1850, a resident of 
Green Township, Shelby County, Ohio. 


Children of Jacob and Catherine (Shank) Smoot
1. James W. Smoot, born 1822, married Jemina Dorsey. q.v. 
2. Mary Smoot, born 1824. 
3. Sarah A. Smoot, born 1826. 
4. J. H. Smoot, born 1833. 
5. ----. 


JOSHUA SMOOT7
(1790 - 18--)
Joshua Smoot, son of John, was born about 1790 in Hampshire County, 
Virginia, and married Mary Haines sometime before 1817. The following 
children were born--Samuel; Walker; Henry; William; Minor Barton; 
Sarah; Eveline; James Rezin (q.v.); Julia; and Harriet. During the War of 
1812 he served in the year 1815 as a private in Captain Jonathan Pugh's 
Company, 114th Virginia Regiment, commanded by Major Poston. He 
later settled in the northern portion of the State and became one of the 
founders and important citizens of the town of Newburg. 


JAMES W. SMOOT8
(1822 - 18--)
James W. Smoot, son of Jacob and Catherine (Shank) Smoot, was born 
about 1822 in Montgomery County, Ohio. In 1847 he married Jemina, 
born 1829 in Shelby County, Ohio, the daughter of John and 
Note: Marriage licenses of Harrison County, Ind., show one issued Oct 8, 
1822, to Nathan Smoot and Elizabeth Helm. 


127

Catherine (Conroy) Dorsey.1 The following children were born to this 
union--Sarah C., born 1850, married C. Offenbacher; Mary L. B. married 
David Mahan; Eva A.; and Ora E. 


JAMES REZIN SMOOT8
(1834 - 1905)
James Rezin Smoot, son of Joshua and Mary (Haines) Smoot, was born 
June 23, 1834, in Hampshire County, Virginia. On March 5, 1854, he 
was married to Susan Howard who was born on February 18, 1830. 


Children of James Rezin and Susan (Howard) Smoot
1. Mary E. Smoot, born Apr. 27, 1856, married S. C. Hartley. Issues: 
Pearl; Ray; and Earl. 
2. Ethel O. Smoot, born Apr. 22, 1862, married James Berthy. Issues: 
Maude; James; Howard; Mary; and Margaret. 
3. John W. Smoot, born Apr. 25, 1864. 
4. Charles Howard Smoot married Alice L. Paul. q.v. 
5. Hattie D. Smoot, born Sept. 21, 1868, died 1933, married June 6, 
1889, C. F. Hammond. 
His first wife died on March 15, 1884, and the next year he married 
Susan Powell, born 1860. 


Children of James Rezin and Susan (Powell) Smoot
6. J. Ray Smoot, born 1886, married 1909 Mollie Fromhart. Issues: 
James; Mary Jane; Walter Thierman. 
7. Grace Smoot. 
8. Clara Smoot, born 1891, married 1935 C. F. Hammond. 
9. Calvin Smoot, born 1894, married 1917 Virginia Wright. Issues: 
Henrietta, born 1919; and Harold Calvin, born Mar. 1925. 
10. Cora Smoot, born 1898, married 1921 Gay Edward Williams. 
Issues: Edward Smoot, born Feb. 1923. 
11. Earl McKinley Smoot, born Oct. 29, 1900, married 1925 Mabel 
Bolton. 
12. Edgar Powell Smoot, born Nov. 1905, married Dec. 1923, Alma 
Sager, born 1906. Issues: Edgar Powell Smoot, born Jan. 1928. 
James Rezin Smoot became a leading citizen of his State and for a 
number of years was president of the First National Bank of Newburg, 
West Virginia. He died in 1905; his widow survived until 1935. 


1For the ancestry of John Dorsey, see "Anne Arundel Gentry", by 
Newman. 


128



CHARLES HOWARD SMOOT9
(1866 - 1930)
Charles Howard Smoot, son of James Rezin and Susan (Howard) Smoot, 
was born March 23, 1866, and died February 28, 1930. On June 12, 
1890, he married Alice Lorena Paul. 


Children of Charles and Alice (Paul) Smoot
1. Raphael Smoot, born and died 1891. 
2. Charles H. P. Smoot, born 1893, died 1896. 
3. Bathia Smoot, born Jan. 7, 1901. 
4. Ralph Omar Smoot, born Feb. 17, 1907, married July 1933, Virginia 
Barton Tincher, born 1911. Issues: Ralph Tincher, and James 
Paul. 
Ralph Omar Smoot, the only surviving son, was born at Allingdale in 
Nicholas County, West Virginia, and attended Davis and Elkins College 
at Elkins, afterwards graduating from the School of Forestry at the 
University of Michigan. Since his graduation he has spent three years in 
the forestry service of his State and in 1936 was appointed Ranger of the 
National Forest of the Cheat District of West Virginia. 

129



EDWARD SMOOT3
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
Edward Smoot is the inferred son of Thomas Smoot who died intestate 
during 1668. He was apparently the youngest and for that reason he 
failed to share in the landed estate of his deceased father. He married 
shortly after he attained his majority, but before he could acquire an 
estate of his own he died leaving a young widow and infant children. His 
wife was Susan ----, no doubt a maiden of Pickawaxon Hundred, 
Maryland. One son is proved, while the others are assumed. 


Children of Edward and Susan Smoot
1. Richard Smoot. q.v. 
2. Stringer Smoot. 
3. Leonard Smoot. 
Edward Smoot died sometime before 1702, his estate being small 
accounts for the fact that no administration was recorded in the orphan's 
court. His son Richard was bound to William Hawton, the community 
blacksmith, who mentioned in a court record that he had in his 
possession "property of Edward Smoot deceased". 
His widow probably married John Mandell who was the guardian of 
Leonard Smoot. On April 14, 1705, John Mand1 entered the cattle mark 
for his son-in-law Leonard Smoot. This instrument, therefore, shows that 
the father of Leonard was deceased by this date and that his widow had 
remarried. Leonard Smoot was living at late as February 1734, when he 
leased for 15 years "Poppleton", lying in Charles County, from Judith 
Dutton. 
The parentage of Stringer Smoot is also inferred, but he belonged of the 
generation to be the son of Edward, and for other good reasons it is 
assumed that he was of this branch. On March 17, 1723, Stringer Smoot 
and John Fenwick were bondsmen for Leonard Green, the executor of 
Cuthbert Sewell, of St. Mary's County. Stringer Smoot was therefore of 
sufficient age and the holder of property in 1723. No further record of 
him has been found. 


RICHARD SMOOT4
(169- - 17--)
Richard Smoot, son of Edward and Susan Smoot, was born in 
Pickawaxon Hundred, Charles County, Maryland. His father being seized 
of only a small estate at his death, Richard Smoot at a very tender age 

130

was bound to William Hawton, a blacksmith. In 1702 William Hawton 
by will bequeathed personal property to Richard Smoot, providing that 
his mother "Susan Smoot do make good and confirm the indenture" to 
his executor John Hawton. William Hawton furthermore stipulated that 
Richard Smoot should have two years of schooling when he reached 7 or 
8 years of age (which would indicate that he was of a very young age in 
1702), and that his cattle were to be marked for him at 16 years of age. 
Fifteen years later Richard Smoot was still a minor, for in 1717 John 
Hawton, blacksmith, and son of the above-named William, devised by 
will his servant Richard Smoot to his executor John Maddox as well as 
the estate of his said servant. 
Richard Smoot was remembered in the will of Mrs. Sarah Maddox, dated 
April 29, 1760 . . . "I give and bequeathed to Richd Smoot who served 
his time with My Deceased Husband John Madox one feather Bed one 
pair Blanketts, one Rugg and four head of Cattle to him and his heirs 
forever, Provided he be Living at my Death But if he be Dead I will the 
same to my Executor hereafter Mentioned". 
Richard Smoot, according to the tax list of 1783, was without land but he 
possessed 3 horses, 9 heads of cattle, no slaves, and had eight persons in 
his household. At the first census of 1790, he had three women at home 
and no slaves. He was not listed in the 1800 census. 
In the same hundred, where Richard Smoot was domiciled, was William 
Smoot who also possessed no land, but in 1783 he had 3 horses, 7 heads 
of cattle, 2 slaves, and eight persons in his family. He apparently died 
before 1790, for in that year Mary Smoot, presumably his widow, was 
the head of a family with another woman comprising her household, and 
2 slaves. In 1800 Mary Smoot was still the head of a family, being more 
than 45 years of age, with 3 slaves. In 1810 she was probably living with 
her daughter, for one does not find her as the head of a family. 
Her will was dated January 27, 1813, and proved February 9, 1813, in 
Charles County by John Weems McPherson, William McPherson, and 
Samuel S. Adams. She devised personalty to her granddaughter Mary 
Abigail Waters, and the residue of her estate to her daughter Sylvia 
Waters. She named her son-in-law John Waters as the executor. 
It can be assumed from the tax list of 1783 that both Richard and William 
had one or more sons. All Smoots listed as heads of families in 1790 and 
1800, however, can more or less be satisfactorily placed, therefore, it is 
believed that if there were any male issues of Richard and William (the 
latter was probably a son of Richard) that they left 


131

Maryland and settled elsewhere. The fact that their children can not be 
determined accounts for the number of Smoots of the next generation 
living in the frontier counties of Virginia, Kentucky, and North Carolina, 
whose lines can not be established beyond this point. 
About the fifth generation, there was an Anne Smoot, beloved by Joshua 
Radcliffe, who in 1759 became the mother of his natural daughter, 
Amelia Smoot. 


132



WILLIAM SMOOT, GENT.3
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
William Smoot, son of Thomas and Jane (Batten) Smoot, was born 
during 1656 in Pickawaxon Hundred, Charles County, Maryland. On 
October 30, 1671, he as the eldest son and heir of Thomas Smoot, 
deceased, of Charles County. received a warrant for 250 acres of land to 
be known as "Smoot's Chance". One hundred and fifty acres had 
previously been returned in the name of Thomas Smoot, while the 
remaining 100 acres had been assigned to him by Robert Ellis, of St. 
Mary's County, who had received rights thereof by assignment from 
Robert Smith and David Smith, due them for services performed in the 
Province. In November 1681, he received 140 pounds of tobacco for 
deeds of public service, believed to be performed during a punitive 
expedition against the Indians. 
In May 1683, William Smoot conveyed to his "brother" Thomas Smoot 
for 10,000 pounds of tobacco land formerly granted John Goldsmith, of 
St. Mary's County, lately deceased, lying on the west side of Wicomico 
River near the head of Smoot's Branch. In October of the same year, he 
deeded to Humphrey Warren for 7,000 pounds of tobacco "The Hills" of 
240 acres on the Wicomico except that portion which formerly was sold 
to Richard Smoot. 
On August 5, 1683. William Smoot and Anne his wife conveyed to 
William Newman for 8,000 pounds of tobacco "Wicomico Fields 
Relations" which had been resurveyed by Captain Randolph Brandt, 
lying in Pickawaxon Hundred, but which was then a portion of a tract 
granted to William Smoot by patent. On August 9, 1684, William Smoot 
and Anne his wife deeded to Captain Randolph Brandt a portion of 
"Wicomico Fields". On August 12, of the same year, William Smoot sold 
to Samuel Luckett for 5,000 pounds of tobacco land adjoining "Johnson's 
Choice" and adjacent to the lands laid out for George Goodrick. 
In April 1689, William Smoot sold another portion of "Wicomico 
Fields", described as his dwelling plantation, to his kinsman Edward 
Smoot for 24,000 pounds of tobacco. The deed stated that it adjoined the 
land conveyed to William Newman and Captain Humphrey Warren. The 
conveyance was witnessed by Randall Bryant, Thomas Gibbons, and 
Elizabeth Butler. 

133

William Smoot in some manner sustained financial reverses, as is evident 
by his numerous conveyances over a period of a few years, perhaps 
through the unsuccessful law suits emanating from his uncle's estate and 
a libel action against Robert Yates. In 1690, however, "William Smoot, 
Gent." petitioned the court to operate an inn . . . "Whereas your petitioner 
descended and for an honest extraction his parents (when in being) lived 
both in good repute and credit among the whole neighborhood and by 
their indulgent care left him a sustenance for his support and his outgoing 
enjoyment and himself for sometime since their decease lived in good 
rank and fashion but since by the frowns of fortune reduced to a mean 
condition, he being willing by any lawful ways or means be may repair 
his fortune . . . Petitions to keep a house of entertainment to provide a 
subsistance for his wife and Children". The court granted him a license to 
maintain an inn paying a yearly fee of 1,200 pounds of tobacco. 
About this time the Northern Neck of Virginia offered opportunities to 
settlers, consequently having encountered unfortunate events in 
Maryland, William Smoot and his young family crossed over to 
Westmoreland County, Virginia, and settled in Copley Parish at a date 
prior to 1695. 
Sometime after 1690 his wife Anne died, and he married secondly 
Eleanor ----. From his will, it would seem to indicate that his three 
daughters had obtained majority and therefore could easily be of the first 
union. His sons, being minors at his death, could possibly be of the 
second wife. 


Children of William Smoot
1. Sarah Smoot. 
2. Winifred Smoot. 
3. Mary Smoot. 
4. William Smoot married Frances ----. q.v. 
5. Thomas Smoot, died 1719. 
6. John Smoot married thrice. q.v. 
On November 9, 1704, William Smoot, of Copley Parish, Westmoreland 
County, conveyed to Lawrence Pope, of Washington Parish same county, 
for 3,000 pounds of tobacco 100 acres of land lying partly in Copley and 
Washington Parishes, being part of a tract granted to William Smoot by a 
deed from the Proprietor's Office in August 1704 of escheated land from 
Alexander Gordon, late of Westmoreland County. Eleanor Smoot, his 
wife, waived her dower rights. 
The will of William Smoot was dated April 12, 1706, and proved in 
Westmoreland County on April 30, 1707, by John Moore and John 
Veale. He bequeathed his two daughters, Sarah and Winifred, the 

134

iwelling-plantation but Sarah was to have the portion on the river. In the 
event that they died without heirs, the plantation was to revert to Mary. 
The latter received 3,000 pounds of tobacco and a feather bed at 
marriage. 
He devised his wife, Eleanor, all land in Stafford County at Aquia to her 
and her heirs forever. His sons, William and Thomas, were willed certain 
personalty, but his wife was to have the "tuition" of his two sons until 21 
years of age. 
A deed in 1717 shows that his widow was unmarried and that a 
posthumous son was born after the writing of his will. Eleanor Smoot, on 
December 5, 1717, deeded to her son John Smoot in the presence of 
Nathaniel Pope, Rebecca Bryant, and John Elliot for natural love and 
affections certain goods and chattels at the age of 18 years. His widow, 
however, later married John Austin and lived in St. Mary's County, 
Maryland, where she died intestate in 1747. 
His son Thomas returned to Maryland and died intestate and without 
issues in 1719. The inventory of his estate was signed by Barton Smoot 
and Barton Hungerford as kinsmen, with Edward Gardner as the 
administrator. The estate was appraised by Joseph Douglas and Thomas 
Hawes. 


WILLIAM SMOOT4
(16-- - 1784)
William Smoot, son of William, was born perhaps in Copley Parish, 
Westmoreland County, Virginia. He was a minor at the death of his 
father in 1707, and was placed under the guardianship of his believed 
mother until majority. In 1713, however, he was of sufficient age to 
witness a lawsuit Higgins vs. Vaughn in Westmoreland County. 
He married Frances ----. The births of his children are recorded in 
North Farnham Parish, Richmond County, which shows that he left the 
domicile of his parents and settled in the former county. Furthermore, the 
births of his children show that he was beyond the age of forty at time of 
marriage. 


Children of William and Frances Smoot
1. John Smoot married Milly ----. q.v. 
2. Eleanor Smoot, born Apr. 28, 1750, married John Bryant, of North 
Farnham, Parish. 
3. Thomas Smoot, born July 26, 1753, apparently died young. 
4. Sarah Smoot, born Apr. 23, 1756, apparently died young. 
5. Anne Smoot, born Sept. 6, 1761, married Le Roy Stott. 
6. Richard Smoot, born Oct. 13, 1764, apparently died young. 
7. Betty Smoot, born Feb. 8, 1771, apparently died young. 

135


On March 28, 1719, William Smoot, of Westmoreland County, Virginia, 
conveyed to Barton Smoot, of Charles County, Maryland, for five 
shillings all claim to property within the Province of Maryland. It is 
therefore proved that William Smoot was of the Maryland family, and 
this deed of gift was probably his interest as well as that of his brothers 
and sisters in the estate of his brother Thomas Smoot who had recently 
died intestate in Maryland. 
After the birth of his children, William Smoot moved to St. Peter's 
Parish, Northumberland County, Virginia, where he died at an advanced 
age. 
His will dated August 28, 1782, was proved December 6, 1784, in 
Northumberland County. The land purchased from William Elliot and 
Peter Beshaugh was to be divided equally between his grandchildren--
William Smoot Bryant and Betty Bryant, children of his daughter 
Eleanor. The plantation in Northumberland County was devised to his 
son John, whereas his granddaughter ---- Stott was willed the plantation 
which had been purchased from William Mason. 
Lishay Bryant was to have the use of 10 acres in Northumberland County 
adjacent to Thaddeus Forrest during life then to his son John Smoot. 
Nancy Austin Everet received personalty, and Betty Brown 
Vanderlandinggham was willed the plantation in Richmond County 
during life then to his son John Smoot. 
The residue of the estate was to be divided among his three children, 
Eleanor Bryant, Nancy Stott (Stoll), and John Smoot. His friends Thomas 
Coleman, Thomas Walker, and John Abbey were named as executors. 
Thomas Coleman and John Abbey relinquished the executorship which 
was later granted to his widow Frances Smoot. 
His son John Smoot died without issues in Northumberland County. His 
will, dated October 2, 1792, was proved November 12, 1792, by Mary 
Stephens, John Bryant, and George Shearly. He named his widow Milly 
Smoot and bequeathed her the entire estate during widowhood then to his 
sister Nelly Bryant, except that part of his estate which came to him by 
his wife. His niece Anne Stoll was to have one year of schooling at the 
age of twelve, paid from the proceeds of his estate. He named his friends, 
Thomas Williams and Bryant Phillipp, the executors. 


JOHN SMOOT4
(1707 - 1789)
John Smoot, the posthumous son of William Smoot and Eleanor his wife, 
was born 1707 in Westmoreland County, Virginia. He returned to 
Maryland, perhaps with his mother and brother, and settled in St. 

136

Mary's County. Facts prove that he had three wives. The name of his first 
wife is unknown, but she became the mother of one child. 


Children of John Smoot by First Marriage
1. Austin Sanford Smoot. q.v. 
John Austin, the step-father of John Smoot, died in St. Mary's County, 
his will being proved on July 16, 1733. He bequeathed his "godson" 
Austin Sanford Smoot the dwelling-plantation, but in the event of his 
death during minority then to his "sons-in-law" John Smoot and William 
Harrison. His wife Eleanor, however, was to enjoy the use of the 
dwelling until his godson attained majority. The two sons-in-law were 
devised 1,000 acres of land on Aquia Creek in Stafford County, Virginia. 
His widow and John Smoot administered on the estate.1 
The first wife of John Smoot lived perhaps only a short time, inasmuch 
as by 1734, John Smoot had become the administrator of Robert Crane, 
late of St. Mary's, by marrying the latter's widow. Accordingly on Mary 
20, 1734, John Smoot and Sarah his wife closed the estate of Robert 
Crane, when the balance of œ214/10/6 3/4 was distributed to the widow 
and the following children, all minors--William, Thomas, Robert, and 
Mary Anne Crane. 


Children of John and Sarah Smoot
2. John Smoot, born 1737; served pvt. St. M. Co., militia, Rev. War; 
as John Smoot Jr. his will, dated Dec. 30, 1788, was proved July 
14, 1789, by John Horn Abel, leaving his entire estate to 2 natural 
sons, Narnole White and Tunsel White; account of Aug. 30, 
1799, showed an estate of œ650. 
3. George Smoot married Anne Beale. q.v. 
4. Cuthbert Smoot. q.v. 
5. Caleb Smoot married twice. q.v. 
In 1738 John Smoot patented "Smoot's Marsh" of 31 acres lying on 
Herring Creek in St. Mary's County, which was augmented in 1746 by a 
survey of 31 acres known as "Smoot's Marsh Rectified". These tracts 
later were possessed by John Crane who in 1793 conveyed them to 
Henry Watts. 
In 1747 John Smoot appeared in court as the administrator of his 
mother's estate, Eleanor Austin, late of St. Mary's County. No inventory 
nor administration accounts, however, are on file at Annapolis. 


1It is sometimes thought that John Smoot married a daughter of John 
Austin, 
but in the early eighteenth century "son-in-law" signified stepson. 
Furthermore, if 
John Smoot had married a daughter of John Austin, the latter would have 
referred to him as grandson instead of godson. 


137

On March 26, 1750, John Smoot conveyed the land which he inherited 
from his step-father to John Dalton, Merchant, of Fairfax County, 
Virginia, and which has been willed in fee simple by his father to his 
mother Eleanor in 1707. The land was described as 407 acres situated 
formerly in Stafford County, but now in Fairfax County upon Tuskarora 
Branch, adjoining the land of William Chandler. 
The second wife of John Smoot was deceased by 1752, for she failed to 
share in the estate of her son William Crane. On August 24, 1752, 
Thomas Crane, the eldest son of Sarah, rendered the final account on the 
estate of his brother William Crane, at which time œ145/13/7 3/4 were 
distributed to the following representatives described as "brothers of the 
deceased" Thomas Crane of full age; Robert Crane and John Smoot 
about 15 years of age; George Smoot about 10 years; Cuthbert Smoot 
about 8 years; and Caleb about 5 years. John Reeder and William 
Morgan were sureties for the administrator. 
The fact that Austin Sanford Smoot was not an heir of William Crane 
proves that he was not of the same mother. Under the English common 
law half brothers of the same mother shared equally. 
John Smoot took upon himself a third wife, but her identity remains a 
mystery to her many decendants. It can be assumed that she was a 
maiden of St. Mary's County. 


Children of John Smoot by His Third Marriage
6. William Smoot married twice. q.v. 
7. Thomas Smoot, died testate St. M. Co., 1796, naming sister Anne 
Barnhouse wife of Rodolph; and brother Hezekiah the guardian 
to niece Elizabeth Smoot. 
8. Hezekiah Smoot. q.v. 
9. Alexander Smoot married Anne Jones. q.v. 
10. Eleanor Smoot married ---- Price. 
11. Anne Smoot married Rodolph Barnhouse. Issues: Frances and 
Elizabeth. 
12. Elizabeth Smoot died testate 1791, leaving presumably a natural 
dau. Elizabeth; brother Thomas to be guardian; other heirs 
Hezekiah Smoot, Alexander Smoot, and Anne Barnhouse. 
In 1760 John Smoot with Abraham Howell was surety for Anne Berry 
when she administered on the estate of James Berry. On June 1, 1769, 
John Smoot was the administrator of Joseph Thomas Gardiner, of St. 
Mary's County. Francis Hammersley was the bondsman. 
The name of John Smoot Sr. appears on the list of the "Worshipful 
Bennett Biscoe's Returns" as taking the oath of fidelity in St. Mary's 
County during the Revolutionary War.2 


2Unpublished Maryland Records, D. A. R. Library, vol. 6, p. 2. 

138

The will of John Smoot Sr. was dated October 26, 1789, and proved in 
St. Mary's County by John Horn Abell, Mary Bean, and John Fenwick of 
John. Peculiarly, he deeded no land but a large number of negroes and 
household furniture. Negroes and other personal property were 
bequeathed to his sons; Caleb, William, Thomas, Hezekiah, and 
Alexander; daughters Eleanor Price. Anne Barnhouse, and Elizabeth 
Smoot; and grandson John Smoot Price. A negro was devised to his 
granddaughter Auny Smoot, but in the event that she died before 
majority then to her sisters Susannah and Eleanor Smoot. A bequest was 
made to another granddaughter Mary Smoot. One shilling each was left 
to the following grandchildren--Barton Smoot, James Smoot, John 
Smoot, George Smoot, William Read Smoot, and Sarah Smoot. The 
crops were to be divided between his two children Hezekiah Smoot and 
Elizabeth Smoot. 


AUSTIN SANFORD SMOOT5
(1727 - 17--)
Austin Sanford Smoot, the eldest son of John, was born about 1727 in St. 
Mary's County, Maryland. He was, however, of age in 1748, when he 
was the administrator de bonis non of the estate of Stephen Mackey, late 
of St. Mary's County. Robert Hagan and Thomas Biscoe were his 
bondsmen. From this fact, it has led to the inference, though proof is 
lacking, that he married into the Mackey or McKay family, and that 
Macky Smoot of the next generation was his son. If such be the case, the 
following are his children. 
1. Mackey Smoot, d.s.p. 
2. Mary Smoot, spinster. 
3. Elizabeth Smoot married ---- Milburn. 
Austin Sanford Smoot predeceased his father, and it is noted that none of 
the grandchildren mentioned in the father's will can be satisfactorily 
placed as those of Austin. John Smoot, it must be remembered, 
bequeathed no realty, and inasmuch as Austin Smoot inherited the 
dwelling-plantation of his godfather John Austin, the father probably 
considered that these grandchildren were well provided for, and therefore 
failed to make them heirs of his personal estate. 
Austin Sanford Smoot was not the head of a family at the first census, 
but Anne Smoot with a male less than 16 years of age (Mackey) was 
probably his widow. 

139

Austin Sanford Smoot in March 1778, took the Oath of Allegiance in St. 
Mary's County, his name appearing on the list of "the worshipful Bennett 
Biscoe's Returns".3 
Prior to this date, however, "Sanford Smoot" with Benjamin Morgan and 
Thomas Austen testified to the validity of the will of Sarah Thomas, 
widow of St. Mary's County. John Horn Abel appraised the estate. 
Inasmuch as the administration accounts of St. Mary's between the years 
1777 and 1806 were destroyed, it has been difficult to prove the 
approximate date of his death or his heirs. 
Mackey Smoot, the believed son of Austin Smoot, was not listed as the 
head of a family until 1820, at which time the census schedule showed 
that he was born prior to 1775 and had in his household a female over 45 
years of age, and a male between the ages of 18 and 26 years. 
Between 1813 and 1818 Mackey conveyed "Poplar Neck" to William 
Thomas; an unnamed tract to Thomas Bennett and Rebecca L. Green; 
"St. Jerome's Plains" to Mary Thomas and others; and "Elizabeth Manor" 
to William Dixon and others. 
The will of Mackey Smoot was dated July 21, 1829, and proved in St. 
Mary's County on December 21, 1829, by Bennett Bean, Uriah Tippett, 
and William Clarke. He bequeathed his realty to his sister, Mary Smoot, 
during life then to George Beal for the services rendered. The residue 
was willed to the children of his sister, Elizabeth Milburn, residing in the 
State of North Carolina. 
His personal property was offered for sale on February 10, 1830, when it 
brought $117.62 1/2. Among the purchasers were Hezekiah Smoot and 
Mary Smoot. His realty, lying in the vicinity of St. Inigoes, was 
appraised in 1831. Among the out houses were a shoe and a blacksmith 
shop. One account of his personal estate displayed a balance of 
$3,284.84. The final distribution was not made until 1850, when the 
unnamed children of Elizabeth Milburn, of North Carolina, were the only 
representatives. 


HEZEKIAH SMOOT5
(1760 - 1834)
Hezekiah Smoot, son of John, was born about 1760 in St. Mary's County. 
The name of his wife is unknown. 


Children of Hezekiah Smoot
1. Letitia Smoot married Reubin Lloyd. License St. M. Co., Jan. 
28, 1812. 
2. Eleanor Smoot married Richard M. Renscher, License St. M. Co., 
Apr. 17, 1829. 


3Unpublished Maryland Records, D. A. R., Library, Wash. 

140

It is probable that he had a son Hezekiah who either predeceased him or 
was not a resident of Maryland at the time of his death. One Hezekiah 
Smoot was drafted in St. Mary's County during July 1813 for services in 
the War of 1812, and inasmuch as Hezekiah Smoot of John was past 50 
years of age, it is concluded that the soldier was of a younger generation. 
He was assigned to the company of Captain Richard Clarke of the 
Second Maryland Regiment commanded by Colonel Fenwick. Most of 
the time he performed guard duty on the shore between St. Inigoes and 
Cedar Point. He was discharged October 30, 1813. 
The will of Hezekiah Smoot was dated August 26, 1834, and proved in 
Charles County on September 9, the same year, by Matilda E. Wilson, 
Robert F. M. Lyons, and George T. St. Clair, with Richard M. Rencher as 
the executor. He named only two heirs, William Renscher and Thomas 
Lloyd, both grandsons. 


141


GEORGE SMOOT5
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
George Smoot, son of John and Sarah Smoot, was born about 1742 in St. 
Mary's County, Maryland.1 He married Anne, daughter of John and Mary 
Magdaline Beale, of St. Mary's County. 
John Beale dated his will May 1, 1792, it being proved on August 7, 
same year, by John Horn Abel, Richard Fenwick, and Robert Hendley. 
He bequeathed his grandsons John and George Smoot, a tract of land in 
Culpeper County, Virginia, but "my dear daughter Anne Smoot to have 
use of it during her natural life". He devised William Beale (named as 
grandson in distribution) land purchased from Joseph Arthis but in the 
event of his death without issues then to Josiah Beale, and in case of the 
latter's death without issues then to the testator's grandson William Read 
Smoot. Other heirs were his grandson Josiah Beale who received the 
dwelling-plantation in St. Mary's County, son Josiah Beale, and 
grandchildren Sarah Beale, Mary Smoot, and Sarah Smoot. The estate 
was distributed to the heirs on January 16, 1794, by Mary Magdaline 
Beale, the executrix. 


Children of George and Anne (Beale) Smoot
1. John Smoot married twice. q.v. 
2. George Smoot married Anne Rowlett. q.v. 
3. Sarah Smoot. 
4. Mary Smoot married James McCawley. License Madison Co., Va., 
Aug. 15, 1795. 
5. William Read Smoot married Frances Clark. q.v. 
George Smoot died intestate perhaps prior to the year 1778. The fact that 
the administration accounts of St. Mary's County are missing between 
1777-1806 prevents the obtainment of the approximate date of his death. 
His name does not appear with his father and brothers as taking the Oath 
of Fidelity in 1778 nor is his name among the militiamen of the county in 
1780. These facts tend to indicate that he died before these dates. 


1Abraham Smoot, the Mormon, stated that his paternal grandfather was 
John 
Smoot, but the records of St. M. Co. dispute this assertion. The Jenifer-
Smoots 
of Madison Co., Va., who kept in closer contact with their Maryland 
kinsmen 
recorded among their private papers that they were descended from 
George 
Smoot and Anne Beale his wife. Furthermore, the Beale traditions carried 
by 
them are substantiated by source records in St. M. Co. 

142



JOHN SMOOT6
(1765 - 1842)
John Smoot, son of George and Anne (Beale) Smoot, was born about 
1765 in St. Mary's County, Maryland. He married first according to 
tradition Elizabeth Jenifer, the union occurring about 1791, and then 
settled in the southern portion of Culpeper County, Virginia. 


Children of John and Elizabeth (Jenifer) Smoot
1. Daniel Jenifer Smoot married Harriet Medley. q.v. 
On January 1, 1793, as residents of Brumfield Parish, Culpeper County, 
John Smoot and Elizabeth his wife, and George Smoot conveyed to 
Thomas Canady 84 acres of land lying in Culpeper County, which had 
been inherited by them from their maternal grandfather. Inasmuch as 
their mother Anne Smoot was to enjoy the use of it during her lifetime 
and she was not a party to the conveyance, it was therefore probable that 
she was deceased by that date. All three Smoots made their mark. The 
witnesses to the transfer were Wharton Canady, Charles Young, and 
Salla Young. 
In 1796 Brumfield Parish of Culpeper County was organized into 
Madison County, consequently John Smoot became a resident ipso facto 
of the newly organized county. The records of St. Mark's Parish, 
Culpeper County, show the marriage of a John Smoot and Anne Canady 
in 1798. It is known that his wife Elizabeth died early, and inasmuch as 
the Canadys were his neighbors, it is probable that this marriage can be 
credited to him. If so, the union was of short duration. It is known, 
however, that he married Lucy Buckner, born March 3, 1786, daughter of 
George and Margaret (Stanley) Thornton, of Orange (now Greene) 
County, Virginia. The bond was secured in Orange County on June 9, 
1806, stating that the prospective bride was the daughter of George 
Thornton. William Buckner and Charles Thornton were the witnesses, 
with the latter as bondsman. The ceremony by the Rev. Isham Tatum, 
was reported in Madison County as occurring on June 12, 1806. 
The census record of Madison County for 1830 shows that there were at 
least four sons and two daughters in his household--one son born 
between 1804-1810; two sons born between 1810-1820; two daughters 
born 1810-1820; and a son born 1825-1830. The following therefore is 
not a complete list of the children. 


143


Children of John and Lucy (Thornton) Smoot
2. George Thornton Smoot, born 1809. Issues: Robert; James; 
George; etc. 
3. John B. Smoot, born 1811. 
4. Mary Elizabeth Smoot, born Apr. 4, 1816, married Apr. 12, 1845, 
Joseph Pettus Graves, born about 1803, in Louisa Co., Va. 
Among their children was John Otho Graves, born Jan. 17, 1846, 
died June 11, 1902, married Margaret Anna Cummins, born Mar. 
8, 1850, died Dec. 6, 1932. 
5. William G. Smoot married Susan C. Bennett. q.v. 
On November 13, 1835, John Smoot and Lucy his wife conveyed land 
lying on the south side of Haphazard Mill Road to Landon Bates, and on 
the same day they deeded 180 acres of land to Daniel Jenifer Smoot for a 
consideration of $600. About this time he migrated to Christian County, 
Kentucky, taking his younger children with him. He died July 15, 1842, 
and was buried on his farm about 12 miles from Hopkinsville. 


GEORGE SMOOT6
(176-- - 1823)
George Smoot, son of George and Anne (Beale) Smoot, was born in St. 
Mary's County, Maryland, before the year 1765, according to subsequent 
census records. By the will of his maternal grandfather he received 
jointly with his brother John, land in Culpeper County, Virginia. On 
January 19, 1793, both recorded as residents of Culpeper, they sold this 
land to Thomas Canady which was described as 84 acres lying in 
Brumfield Parish. 
Sometime after this date George Smoot migrated to Kentucky and settled 
in that part of Franklin County which in 1819 became Owen County. 
Here about 1806 he married Anne, the daughter of William and Jemina 
(Owen) Rowlett, born May 2, 1787, and as tradition has it in Virginia. It 
is said that George Smoot died in Owen County during 1823. His widow 
remarried and died March 16, 1871. 


Children of George and Anne (Rowlett) Smoot
1. Nancy Beale Smoot, born Feb. 24, 1807, Franklin Co., Ky., died 
July 6, 1891, married Feb. 9, 1826, John Freeman, born Sept. 6, 
1804, died July 23, 1871, Millard Co., Utah, son of Arthur and 
Nancy Anne Freeman. Issues: Adeline; Elizabeth Caroline; 
Nancy; William Hamblin; Martishia; John Woodruff; Columbus 
Reed; Margaret Phoebe; Levi; Jemina; Rosaline; Martha. 
2. William Rowlett Smoot, born Sept. 1808, Franklin Co., Ky., died 
1831. 

144

3. Reed Smoot, married Eliza Thomas. q.v. 
4. Martishia Smoot, born Oct. 28, 1812, Henry Co., Ky., died Nov. 
3, 1886, married Samuel Smith, born June 11, 1807, Montgomery 
Co., Tenn., son of Thomas and Sarah (Harvey) Smith. Issues: 
Emma; Joseph; Sarah Anne; Abraham Owen; Martishia 
Rosalia. 
5. Abraham Owen Smoot married five times. q.v. 
6. Jemina Smoot, born Apr. 24, 1818, Franklin Co., Ky., died 1908, 
married Hezekiah, born Mar. 12, 1820, Bainbridge, N. Y., son of 
Benjamin and Phoebe (Crosby) Peck. Issues: Phoebe Anne; 
Margaret; Benjamin; Ida; Hezekiah; George; Melvina. 


WILLIAM READ SMOOT6
William Read Smoot, son of George and Anne (Beale) Smoot, was born 
about 1767 in St. Mary's County, Maryland. He migrated to Virginia 
with his brothers and on May 31, 1796, in Madison County he secured 
license to marry Fannie, the daughter of Mary Clark. 
The first available census for Kentucky, that is 1810, shows William 
Read Smoot as the head of a family in Franklin County, with six young 
children, a wife, and five slaves. In 1820 he had ten children at home, 
was engaged in agriculture, but had no slaves. In 1840 he was listed for 
the first time as Reed Smoot--but his name does not appear in the 1850 
census for Owen County. The following list of children is probably 
incomplete. 


Children of William Read and Frances (Clark) Smoot
1. George Smoot, married Dorothy Dennis. q.v. 
2. Letitia Smoot, born 1805, married John Clements. License Nov. 
16, 1821, Owen Co. 
3. William Smoot married Martha Marston. q.v. 
4. Mary Smoot married Ebenezer Wallace. License Aug. 12, 1824 
(7). 
5. Druzilla Smoot married Pleasant Bush. License May 29, 1839, 
Owen Co. 
6. Thomas Smoot, married twice. q.v. 


DANIEL JENIFER SMOOT7
(1792 - 1865)
Daniel Jenifer Smoot, son of John and Elizabeth (Jenifer) Smoot, was 
born January 29, 1792, in Brumfield Parish, which in 1793 formed the 
nucelus for Madison County, Virginia. On July 30, 1814, Daniel Smoot 
enlisted in Madison County for six months' service as a private 

145

in Captain Joseph Brock's company of Cavalry, Eighty-second Virginia 
Regiment, War of 1812. He was discharged on January 25, 1815, most of 
his service being spent at Camp Holly, Virginia. 
On April 12, 1821, Daniel Jenifer Smoot married Harriet, born 
November 7, 1797, in Virginia, the daughter of Ambrose and Frances 
Medley. The estate of Ambrose Medley was settled in Madison County 
during 1810, showing a widow and fourteen heirs, eight of whom were 
minors. On June 9, 1821, Daniel Jenifer Smoot and his wife Harriott 
conveyed to Mary B. Medley 89 acres of land in Madison County for 
$1,000 that had been "assigned to Harriott Smoot as one of the heirs of 
Ambrose Medley, deceased". 


Children of Daniel Jenifer and Harriet (Medley) Smoot
1. Theophilus Smoot married twice. q.v. 
2. Elizabeth Jenifer Smoot married Dec. 23, 1844, Albert Payne, and 
secondly ---- Sibert. 
3. Andrew Jackson Smoot, born 1829. 
4. Horace Smoot, born 1831, M. D., surgeon, General Staff, C. S. A. 
5. Frances Burton Smoot, born Sept. 22, 1833, married Nov. 22, 1854, 
Jacob Howard Plecker, born Oct. 13, 1829, in Augusta Co., Va., 
son of Jacob. Issues: Emma, etc. 
6. Hester A. Smoot, born 1837. 
7. Catherine Medley Smoot, born 1841, married F. C. Gibson, born 
1828, Culp. Co., son of T. G. and P. Gibson. 
Daniel Jenifer Smoot acquired a considerable estate, his realty being 
assessed at $9,000 in 1850, and his plantation being stocked with more 
than 25 negro slaves. In 1860 his personal estate was appraised at 
$28,030, and his post office address was Madison Court House. His wife 
died April 16, 1860; he died August 8, 1865. 
The will of Daniel Jenifer Smoot was dated August 5, 1865, and proved 
in Madison County, Virginia, August 24, 1865, by Andrew Carpenter 
and Benjamin H. Sparks. He bequeathed to his daughter Catherine M. 
Gibson the land near Good Hope Meeting House adjoining the land of 
Reuben Tucker and the Poor House, containing 210 acres, and also 
personal property. To his grandson Jenifer Smoot, he devised his riding 
mare. The residue of his lands was to be divided among his children--
Theophilus Smoot, Horace Smoot, Elizabeth J. Sibert, Frances B. 
Plecker, and Catherine M. Gibson. He named his friend and neighbor 
William A. Hill as executor. 

146


WILLIAM G. SMOOT7
(1826 - ----)
William G. Smoot, son of John and Lucy (Thornton) Smoot, was born 
1826 in Madison County, Virginia. He accompanied his parents to 
Christian County, Kentucky, but after 1850 he settled in Calloway 
County, same state, where he was the head of a family at the 1880 
census. He stated in that year that his father was born in Maryland. His 
wife was Susan C. Bennett, born 1828 in Kentucky. His household in 
1880 consisted of, besides himself and wife, his son Jefferson D., born 
1861; daughter Lucy E., born 1864; and his sister-in-law Elizabeth J. 
Bennett. 
Living in Calloway County in 1880 was also C. M. Smoot, born 1852 in 
Kentucky, with a wife Maggie born 1856, and an unnamed infant aged 
two months. 


REED SMOOT7
(1810 - 1879)
Reed Smoot, son of George and Anne (Rowlett) Smoot, was born 
November 23, 1810, in Franklin County, Kentucky. He married Eliza 
Thomas, born 1817, in Sumner County, Tennessee, daughter of Henry 
and Sarah (Mongrel) Thomas. He became a member of the Mormon 
Church in Calloway County, Kentucky, the home of his wife's parents. 
He joined the colony in Illinois but remained there and did not migrate to 
Utah with the other members of the Church. He died January 22, 1879. 


Children of Reed and Eliza (Thomas) Smoot
1. Benjamin Franklin Smoot married Amanda Barley. q.v. 
2. Warren Owen Smoot, born Oct. 28, 1843, Johnson Co., Ill., died 
Oct. 20, 1863; pvt. Co. K, 14 Regt. Ill. Inf., Civil War. 
3. Cinderella Melvina Smoot, born Sept. 16, 1856, Johnson Co., Ill., 
died Apr. 13, 1881. 
4. Martha Jane Smoot, born Oct. 12, 1857, Johnson Co., Ill., died 
Sept. 22, 1881. 
5. Levi Smoot, settled in Sumner Co., Tenn. 
6. H. A. Smoot. 


GEORGE SMOOT7
(1801 - 1883)
George Smoot, son of William Read and Frances (Clark) Smoot, was 
born February 8, 1801, in Franklin County, Kentucky. On July 29, 1828, 
he secured license in Owen County to marry Dorothy Dennis, with 
Batson Dennis as the bondsman. The below-named children composed 

147

their father's household in 1850, when he was a resident of Owen 
County, with realty assessed at $3,000. In 1828 he left Kentucky and 
lived for a time in Indiana, but returned to Owen County in 1835. He 
died about 1883. 


Children of George and Dorothy (Dennis) Smoot
1. Noel Smoot, born 1830. 
2. Henry Smoot, born 1832. 
3. Nancy Smoot, born 1833. 
4. John C. Smoot, born Feb. 4, 1835, in Clinton Co., Ind., married 
Susan Marston. 
5. Letitia Smoot, born 1837, died 1853. 
6. Frances Smoot, born 1839. 
7. William Smoot, born 1840. 
8. Lucy Smoot, born 1841. 
9. Martha Smoot, born 1843. 
10. Pleasant Smoot, born 1846. 


WILLIAM SMOOT7
(1800 - 1843)
William Smoot, son of William Reed and Frances (Clark) Smoot, was 
born perhaps about 1800 in Franklin County, Kentucky. He married 
Martha, born 1808 in Kentucky, the daughter of William Marston, the 
license being secured in Owen County on June 23, 1826. He resided at 
Owenton, the county seat, where he died during the summer of 1843. His 
will, dated July 14, 1843, was proved on September 1, following. He 
became the father of six children--James, born 1828; Fielding, born 
1833; Frances, born 1835; John, born 1837; Hiram, born 1840; and 
William, born 1842. 


THOMAS SMOOT7
(1822 - 18--)
Thomas Smoot, son of William Read and Frances (Clark) Smoot, was 
born February 28, 1822, in Owen County, Kentucky. His first wife was 
Mary, daughter of William and Vianna (Moore) Smoot, of Henry 
County, Kentucky, whom he married in 1845. The following children 
were born to this union--Vianna; William; Elbert; Mary; and Edmond. 
His first wife died in 1861, and after a widowerhood of six years he 
married Lucy ----, widow of Dr. F. Jones, of Shelby County, Kentucky. 
Of this marriage six children were born--Lettitia; Nancy; Mattie; Reuben; 
George; and Sarah. 

148


LIEUT. THEOPHILUS SMOOT, C. S. A.8
(1823 - 1891)
Theophilus Smoot, son of Daniel Jenifer and Harriet (Medley) Smoot, 
was born about 1823 in Madison County, Virginia. On May 8, 1845, he 
secured license in Madison County to marry Lucy Anne E., born about 
1823, the daughter of Joseph Hume. 


Children of Theophilus and Lucy (Hume) Smoot
1. Joseph M. Smoot, born 1846. 
2. George A. Smoot, born 1847. 
3. Jenifer G. Smoot, born 1853. 
During the War Between the States, Theophilus Smoot served as First 
Lieutenant of Company C, Fourth Virginia Cavalry. He resigned his 
commission in May 1862. On June 15, 1875, he secured license to marry 
Martha C. Garrett, widow, born in Albemarle County, Virginia, daughter 
of Garth and Elizabeth (Graves) Brightberry. No issues resulted from this 
union. 
He died intestate in Madison County during 1891. His estate was 
appraised on September 29, 1891, showing a "watch sent to J. M. 
Smoot". The estate was ultimately distributed among the three 
representatives. Some of his descendants settled in Texas. Recently, 
patriotic citizens of Madison County placed at his unmarked grave a 
tablet commemorating his services to the Confederacy. 


BENJAMIN FRANKLIN SMOOT8
Benjamin Franklin Smoot, son of Reed and Eliza (Thomas) Smoot, was 
born December 30, 1848, in Simpson Township, Johnson County, 
Illinois. On November 20, 1873, he married Elizabeth Amanda Barley, 
born in Hardin County, Illinois, daughter of Samuel and Jane Barley. 
Three children were born: Thomas R.; James A.; and Eliza L. 


149


CUTHBERT SMOOT5
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
Cuthbert Smoot, son of John and Sarah Smoot, was born about 1744 in 
St. Mary's County, Maryland. In 1778 he took the Oath of Fidelity and 
Allegiance to the State of Maryland, and in 1780 he was enrolled as a 
private in the militia of St. Mary's County.1 Other than these facts, very 
little is known of his public or private life. He predeceased his father, and 
owing to the destruction of records in St. Mary's County, no 
administration accounts on his estate are available. No marriage has been 
proved, but through the process of elimination it is believed and assumed 
that the five children named in the will of their Smoot grandfather--
Auny, Susannah, Eleanor, James (q.v.) and Barton--are his issues. 
The presence of the name Barton among his children has sometime led to 
the supposition that this branch of the family was directly descended 
from Elizabeth Barton who married Captain Thomas Smoot. Barton was 
a favorite and popular name among the families of Southern Maryland 
and was carried by Barton lines other than that of the Smoot. It is 
therefore probable that the name came through the wife of Cuthbert 
Smoot whose identity has not been established. 


JAMES SMOOT6
(176- -1837)
James Smoot, believed son of Cuthbert Smoot, was born in St. Mary's 
County, Maryland. He followed his kinsmen to Culpeper County, 
Virginia, and there on December 18, 1797, he conveyed slaves, 
household furniture, and other personal property to Biscoe Smith, of 
Culpeper County. The witnesses were Philip Graves, Joseph Graves, and 
Henry Walker. The date of this conveyance approximates apparently the 
time of his migration to Rowan County, North Carolina. 
On September 3, 1805, he purchased from Isaiah Renshaw and Esther his 
wife, of Rowan County, North Carolina, for the consideration of $750 
land on the south waters of Bear Creek in Rowan County which had been 
granted by the State to Abraham Renshaw. The conveyance was 
substantiated by Caleb Smoot and Samuel Austin. 


1Unpublished Maryland Records, Md. His. Soc., Balto. 


150

He and Jemina his wife deeded 312 acres of land "on the west side of Elk 
Runn a little below William Walker's old saw mill" in Virginia for the 
sum of œ641/5/9. The deed was recorded in Madison County on January 
19, 1807. 


Children of James Smoot
1. Mary Smoot married Gassaway Gaither.(*) 
2. Elizabeth Smoot married Walter Gaither.(*) 
3. Margaret Smoot married ---- Anderson. 
4. Henrietta Smoot married ---- Lyons. 
5. Brittania Smoot married ---- Sloan. 
6. Thomas B. Smoot. 
7. Eleanor Smoot married ---- Anderson. 
In May 1814 he and Francis Neely, Esq. with others were appointed to 
"lay off one year's provision for the widow and family of James Hanna, 
deceased". In 1815 he was a member of the commission to partition the 
land of Joseph Cope. On November 1, 1836, as a resident of Davie 
County, he sold land in Rowan County on the forks of the Yadkin River 
to Henry R. Austin. The deed was witnessed by H. Austin and Gassaway 
Gaither. During the same year he sold negroes to William Neely. 
The will of James Smoot was dated October 8, 1836, and proved in 
Davie County, North Carolina, at the August term of the court in 1837, 
with Gassaway Gaither as the executor. He named his son Thomas B. 
Smoot; daughters Mary Gaither, Margaret Anderson, Henrietta Lyons, 
and Brittania Sloan; granddaughter Elizabeth Gaither (daughter of 
Elizabeth), and the heirs of his daughter Elizabeth Gaither and the heirs 
of his daughter Eleanor Anderson. 


(*)For the ancestry of Gassaway and Walter Gaither, see "Anne Arundel 
Gentry", by Newman. 


151



CALEB SMOOT5
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
Caleb Smoot, son of John and Sarah Smoot, was born 1747 in St. Mary's 
County, Maryland. He married first a maiden of Maryland, but so far her 
identity is unknown. At the census of 1790, he was listed as the head of a 
family in St. Mary's County, with four women and two slaves. 


Children of Caleb Smoot
1. Caleb Smoot married Nancy ----. q.v. 
2. Sarah P. Smoot married Frederick Thompson. License Madison 
Co., Va., June 22, 1795. 
3. Anne Grace Smoot married Joseph Ham. License Orange Co., 
Va., Mar. 5, 1803. 
Caleb Smoot ultimately moved to Orange County, Virginia, and settled 
in St. Thomas Parish. On September 10, 1795, he obtained license in that 
parish to marry Martha McClamrock, spinster. His bondsman was James 
Smoot. Apparently no issues resulted from this union. His will was dated 
March 1797, and proved in Orange County on July 24, 1797. He 
bequeathed his entire estate to his wife, Martha, during life, then to his 
three children--Caleb Smoot, Sarah Thompson, and Anne Grace Smoot. 


CALEB SMOOT6
Caleb Smoot, son of Caleb, was born between 1765-1784, in St. Mary's 
County, Maryland. He undoubtedly accompanied his parent to Orange 
County, Virginia, but he left that county shortly after his father's death in 
1797. Sometime after 1800 he settled in Rowan County, North Carolina, 
where in 1805 he witnessed the land transaction between James Smoot 
and another party. On February 4, 1808, he sold to William Knight for 
the consideration of œ100 a tract of land consisting of 520 acres which 
had been granted to Gasper Sain on the waters of Bear Creek. At this 
time his wife Nancy waived her dower. The transfer was witnessed by 
James McGuire, George Clamroach, and David Clamroach. He was the 
head of a family in Rowan County in 1810 with a female born 1794-
1800, a male within the same period, and one girl and three boys born 
1800-1810. He was not the head of a family in that county at the next 
census. 

152



WILLIAM SMOOT5
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
William Smoot, son of John, was born about 1750 in St. Mary's County, 
Maryland. He married twice, and it seems as if both wives, certainly the 
second, were of Jenifer lineage. The name of his first wife is unknown, 
but at least two of her children bore the distinctive family cognomen of 
Jenifer. This first union probably occurred in St. Mary's County prior to 
1778. His second marriage, however, took place in Madison County, 
Virginia, where on June 24, 1793, license was obtained to marry 
Margaret Jenifer. In his will he referred to three of his sons with the 
given names of Jenifer, and it is noticed that in subsequent public records 
two other sons appeared with "J" as a middle initial. 


Children of William Smoot
1. Jenifer Smoot married Rebecca Melone. q.v. 
2. William Smoot married Elizabeth Loker. q.v. 
3. Daniel Jenifer Smoot married Polly Anderson. q.v. 
4. John Jenifer Smoot married Mary Trout. q.v. 
5. Elisha A. J. Smoot. q.v. 
6. Samuel Jenifer Smoot married Rebecca ----. q.v. 
7. Eliphalet Smoot married Mary ----. q.v. 
During the Revolutionary War William Smoot served his country, and in 
1780 he was enrolled as a member of the militia forces of St. Mary's 
County in the same battalion with his brothers Cuthbert, John, and 
Thomas.1 In 1790 he was the head of a family in St. Mary's County, with 
5 males under the age of 16, 2 females, and 3 slaves. According to 
tradition, he lived at one time near Occoquan, Prince William County, 
Virginia, which was probably between the years 1790 and 1806, for by 
the latter year he was domiciled in Rowan County, North Carolina, with 
his family. On January 12, 1807, in the latter county he certified a deed 
of his half-brother. 
He acquired much land in North Carolina, though the records fail to 
show any purchases or grants, and it is not believed that he was 
bequeathed any through last wills and testaments. 
At the census of 1810, he appears as the head of a family, with his three 
youngest sons at home and a feminine member of approximately 
1Unpub. Md. Records, Md. Hist. Soc., Balto., p. 251. 


153


his age who was probably his wife, His wife, however, predeceased him, 
as she was not mentioned in his will. 
The will of William Smoot was dated May 13, 1815, and proved at the 
August term of the court in Rowan County, North Carolina, by Samuel 
Little and Elisha J. Smoot. Jenifer was willed negroes and other 
personalty as well as the second son William. Daniel Jenifer was 
bequeathed negroes and land on Third Creek adjoining the estate of 
Solomon Dickson, containing 50 acres. John Jenifer was devised negroes 
and 160 acres of land adjoining that of John Reavis, also $40 to be paid 
him by his brother Eliphalet, $50 to be paid him by his brother Samuel 
within four years, and $30 to be paid him by his brother Elisha within 
three years. Elisha received negroes and 160 acres of land adjoining that 
of John Cooke and William Stillman. Samuel was bequeathed negroes 
and the dwelling-plantation and various personalty at majority. The 
residue of his estate was to be sold at auction and the proceeds divided 
among the five youngest sons. Daniel Jenifer and Elisha were named as 
executors. He signed his name as William Smoote Sr. 


JENIFER SMOOT6
(1778 - 18--)
Jenifer Smoot, son of William by his first wife, was born about 1778 in 
St. Mary's County, Maryland. On October 5, 1805, in Orange County, 
Virginia, he negotiated a bond to marry Rebecca, the daughter of John 
Melone, with Michael Lower as his surety and William McCome as the 
witness. He subsequently migrated to Rowan County, North Carolina, 
with his parents, where in 1810 he was the head of a family with his 
wife, two girls and a boy--the children all being under 10 years of age. 
On July 25, 1810, he purchased from Gilbert Nowell, of Rowan County, 
102 acres of land on the waters of Hunting and Bear Creeks. The 
transaction was witnessed by John Little Jr. On November 11, 1812, he 
conveyed this tract for $200 to William Fulford, at which time William 
Jarvis and John Boone witnessed the transfer. 
He returned to Orange County, Virginia, perhaps the native country of 
his wife, and there on July 30, 1814, he enlisted for services in the War 
of 1812. His first term extended to November 30, 1814. On December 
11, following and to February 4, 1815, he served as a private in an 
artillery company commanded by Captain Law T. Dade, at which time he 
was stationed at Camp Holly, Virginia, attached to the First 

154

Virginia Regiment, commanded by Colonel Yancey. At discharge he was 
granted travel allowance for 100 miles "from Camp Holly to Orange 
County Court House", the latter place being the point of rendezvous. 


WILLIAM SMOOT5
(1780 - 1852)
William Smoot, son of William, was born December 22, 1780, in St. 
Mary's County, Maryland. On February 11, 1808, in his native county he 
secured license to marry Elizabeth Parrott, the daughter of Thomas and 
Rebecca (Mackall) Loker, of St. Mary's County. He lived for a time in 
the county of his birth, where he was the head of his household at the 
1810 census. 
Locks of the hair of William Smoot, his wife, and all ten children have 
been carefully preserved to the present day and are now in possession of 
a great-granddaughter, Miss Annibel Stine, of Tuscumbia, Alabama. The 
births of the following children were taken from an old sampler, now in 
possession of Miss Stine. 


Children of William and Elizabeth (Loker) Smoot
1. Thomas Loker Smoot married Elizabeth Waters. q.v. 
2. William Smoot, born Jan. 2, 1811, d.s.p. 1836. 
3. Ann Elizabeth Smoot, born Sept. 1, 1812, died July 10, 1845, 
married Dec. 29, 1836, at Tuscumbia, John Helden, born Aug. 3, 
1810, at London, died Apr. 24, 1846. Issues: George Franklin, 
born Sept. 29, 1838; Rose Ann, born Jan. 20, 1841, married Dec. 
26, 1878, Benjamin Franklin Stine, born Mar. 22, 1842; Charles 
William, born Mar. 22, 1842; and 5 infants died young. 
4. Rebecca Smoot, born 1814, died 1818. 
5. Priscilla Isabella Smoot, born May 15, 1816, d.s.p. Apr. 11, 1883, 
married first cousin, Isaac, son of Thomas and Margaret 
(Loker) Young. 
6. Eliphalet Smoot, born Jan. 6, 1818, died 1828. 
7. Cynthia Everlina Smoot, born Jan. 6, 1820, married William Mulligan, 
settled in the West. Issues: William; James, etc. 
8. Margaret Loker Smoot, born Oct. 30, 1821, died June 1893, married 
1838 at Tuscumbia, Edward Washington Manley, died July 
27, 1872, at Tuscumbia, son of William and Mary Manley. 
Issues: William Edward, born Mar. 4, 1839; Mary Lavinia, born 
Apr. 19, 1842; Daniel Napoleon; Columbia Everlina; and Marion 
Wallace (q.v.). 
9. Daniel Smoot, born Aug. 24, 1823, d.s.p. 
10. John Mackall Smoot, born 1826, enlisted Apr. 29, 1847, 3d U. S. 
Regt. of Dragoons, killed in action, Mexican War. 

155


His youth was spent at his father's home in Virginia, according to 
tradition near Occoquan, but facts seem to place it in Madison County. 
At other times he lived in Rockbridge County, Virginia, "Kanrow City 
near Elk River", and in North Carolina. A letter addressed to him at 
Kanrow City in 1822 by his mother-in-law, still in possession of a 
descendant, asked, "What has become of the Jenifer Smoots and all of 
them?" 
On July 18, 1816, after a residence of a few years in Rowan County, 
North Carolina, he conveyed to Baker Johnson land on the south fork of 
the Yadkin River where he "formerly lived", being part of a tract granted 
to Caleb Webb by patent in 1784. The consideration was $1,200. His 
wife Elizabeth P. Smoot relinquished her dower, and the deed was 
proved by E. A. J. Smoot and Richard Stroud. 
On July 21, 1834, William Smoot, no domicile mentioned, gave his 
receipt to Thomas Loker, of St. Mary's County, the administrator of John 
Mackall Jr., for $150 which was his wife's share in the estate of the said 
John Mackall. 
About 1835 he and a party of Virginians, including Carters, Atkinsons, 
Cooks, and others, migrated southward and after three weeks of travel 
they ultimately settled on the south bank of the Tennessee River at 
Tuscumbia, Alabama, where a number of his descendants are still living. 
It is traditional that enroute he visited his brother "Dr. Smoot" 
somewhere in Kentucky. He died at his home in Tuscumbia on March 
27, 1852; his widow survived until August 10, 1853. 


DANIEL JENIFER SMOOT6
(1784 - 1843)
Daniel Jenifer Smoot, son of William by his first wife, was born January 
1, 1784, in St. Mary's County, Maryland, according to his family Bible 
now in the possession of a descendant. He spent his later youth in 
Virginia, then migrated with his parent to Rowan County, North 
Carolina. On December 27, 1811, in that county he negotiated a bond to 
marry Polly Anderson, with Garland Anderson and John March Sr. as his 
sureties. 


Children of Daniel Jenifer and Polly (Anderson) Smoot
1. Harriet Smoot. 
2. Nancy Smoot. 
3. Hezekiah Smoot married Lucy.----. q.v. 
4. William Smoot married Martha de Jarrell. q.v. 
5. Charles A. Smoot, born 1818. 


156

6. Alexander Smoot married Julianna ----. q.v. 
7. Daniel Jenifer Smoot, born 1824, died June 26, 1880. 
8. Samuel Smoot. q.v. 
9. John Smoot. 
10. Richard Smoot married Eleanor Witten. q.v. 
11. J. (son) Smoot. 
12. Thomas A. Smoot, born 1836, settled in Kansas City, Mo., living 
in 1906; had issues. 
On July 12, 1812, Daniel Jenifer Smoot purchased from James Hanna 
and his wife 100 acres of land, at which time Charles Anderson Sr. 
witnessed the conveyance. On December 23, 1814, he sold to John 
Welch for œ180 land on Hunting Creek, with John Lock and Eliphalet 
Smoot as witnesses. His wife Mary Smoot waived dower. On August 10, 
1820, he conveyed to Richard Anderson for $650 land on Andrew's 
Creek, consisting of 150 acres, beginning at a sycamore on Garland 
Anderson to an oak on William Iiams' line, then south to William Iiams' 
line. The deed was witnessed by Garland Anderson and Eliphalet Smoot. 
On August 22, 1823, he sold to John Smoot for $400 land of 200 acres 
on the bank of Hunting Creek. The transfer was witnessed by Charles 
Anderson Sr., and signed by Daniel J. Smoot and Polly Smoot. 
During 1825 Daniel J. Smoot and his young family left Rowan County 
and settled on the Pond Fork of the Little Coal River in Logan County, 
Virginia (now Boone County, West Virginia), bringing a number of 
slaves with them. There he found Price cousins, children of his aunt, 
Eleanor (Smoot) Price. It is traditional that the Price family was among 
the first settlers in that section of West Virginia. 
On April 9, 1829, as a resident of Logan County, Virginia, he purchased 
from John Smoot of Rowan County, land on Hunting Creek containing 
200 acres. The conveyance was witnessed by James Glascock, Beal 
Iiams, and Jesse Oakes. Five days later he sold this tract to James 
Glascock and William Casey, of Rowan County, and to Abner F. 
Caldwell and John M. Young, of Iredell County, North Carolina. 
The census schedules for 1830 and 1840 show Daniel Jenifer Smoot to 
be one of the largest slave owners in Logan County, a portion of 
Virginia, which was not a strong slave-holding section. He died on 
November 15, 1843, and his widow died on December 7, 1880. 


JOHN JENIFER SMOOT6
John Jenifer Smoot, son of William, was born between the years 1784 
and 1794 in St. Mary's County, Maryland. He migrated with his parent to 
Rowan County, North Carolina, where on September 24, 1808, he signed 
a bond expressing his intentions to marry Mary Trout. 

157

William Smoot, his father, and John March Sr., were sureties. In 1810 
John J. Smoot with his wife was the head of a family in Rowan County, 
with a son less than 10 years of age. He, however, was not the head of a 
family in Rowan County at the 1810 census. 


ELISHA A. JENIFER SMOOT6
Elisha A. Jenifer Smoot, son of William, on May 16, 1821, deeded 167 
acres of land in Rowan County, North Carolina, to John Reaves. The 
conveyance was witnessed by John Little and Thomas H. Cain. No 
further record of him has been found in this research. 


SAMUEL JENIFER SMOOT6
(1797 - 1883)
Samuel Jenifer Smoot, son of William and Margaret (Jenifer) Smoot, was 
born 1797 in Virginia. At the 1880 census as a resident of Davie County, 
North Carolina, he stated that his father and mother were born in 
Maryland. He accompanied his parents to Rowan County, North 
Carolina, and at the death of his father in 1815, a minor, he was 
bequeathed the dwelling-plantation which lay in the vicinity of Calahala 
post office. 
On February 3, 1820, he conveyed to Basil Dyson, of Rowan County, for 
the consideration of œ25 land which had been deeded by Abraham 
Bromdon to Henry Hicks, and from the latter to Leven Benston hence to 
John Prather. It was then bought by William Smoot at a sheriff sale and 
willed to him by his father William Smoot. The tract was adjacent to the 
land of William Howard. The conveyance was certified by Garland 
Anderson, James Davis, and Charles Andrews. On January 10, 1822, he 
purchased from Jacob, John, and Robert H. Hughey 170 acres of land in 
Rowan County, at which time William Price witnessed the deed of 
conveyance. 
It was not until about 1838 that he married Rebecca ----, a native of 
North Carolina as well as her parents. 


Children of Samuel Jenifer and Rebecca Smoot
1. Mary A. Smoot, born 1840. 
2. Daniel J. Smoot, Lieut. 4th N. C. Regt. C. S. A., killed in action 
May 19, 1864. 
3. Eleanor Smoot, born 1845, married ---- Daniel. 
4. Susan Smoot, died young. 
5. William Smoot, born 1849. 
6. Alexander Smoot, born 1851. 


158

7. Thomas M. Smoot, born 1854, married Mar. 15, 1877, Jennie Bell 
Coon, born 1857; she married secondly H. E. Robertson, May 
20, 1897. 
8. Samuel Jenifer Smoot, born 1856. 
9. George W. Smoot, born 1859, died young. 
10. Susan Smoot, born 1860. 
11. Emily Smoot, born 1863, married Jan. 2, 1889, A. C. Hansard. 
12. George Washington Smoot, born 1865. 
The will of Samuel Jenifer Smoot was dated May 25, 1880, and proved 
in 1883 in Davie County, with his son George W. Smoot as the executor. 
He willed his wife, Rebecca, his entire landed estate and personalty, and 
mentioned the following children--Mary A. Smoot, Eleanor Daniel, 
Susannah Smoot, Alexander Smoot, Samuel J. Smoot, Emily T. Smoot, 
and George W. Smoot. 
His daughter, Ellen Daniel, of Davie County, negotiated her will in 1909, 
and left her entire estate to her nephew Charles Clinton Smoot, the 
husband of her niece Mary Lizzie Smoot, which included 38 acres of 
land adjoining the land of Rebecca Martin, A. L. Dayvalt, and others, 
being the division of the land of Samuel J. Smoot "my father". 


ELIPHALET SMOOT6
Eliphalet Smoot, son of William, was born prior to 1790, probably in 
Maryland. There is a record of an Eliphalet Smoot who enlisted as a 
private in the militia of Anson County, North Carolina, during the War of 
1812, then there is an enlistment of an Eliphalet Smoot at Fayetteville, on 
August 17, 1813, as a drum major in the militia under Major Cameron. 
On September 23, same year, he was attached to Captain David L. Evans' 
Company of Drafted Artillery, and was reported "sick" at Deepwater 
Point. The original of the following is on file at the Adjutant General 
Office, Washington. 
"This is to certify that Eliphalet Smoot musician in my company has 
faithfully served the term of Five Months and two days in the Service of 
the United States and has not receive any compensation for the same as 
well appear from the Muster Roll. His turn of Service Expired on the 19 
Instant he is further Entitled to pay for traveling home one Hundred and 
Seventy five miles given under my hand at Camp Deep Water Point 
North Carolina this 20 January 1814". 
(Signed) David L. Evans Capt. 
Eliphalet Smoot, who was born 1811 in North Carolina and the head of a 
family in Davie County, North Carolina, in 1850, was probably a son. In 
that year he had in his household his wife Mary, born 1826 in North 
Carolina, Nancy Holman, aged 17, and the following children--Samuel 
Smoot, aged 4, Thomas Smoot, aged 2, and Margaret Smoot, born 
September 1850. 

159



THOMAS LOKER SMOOT7
(1808 - 18--)
Thomas Loker Smoot, son of William and Elizabeth (Loker) Smoot, was 
born December 16, 1808, in St. Mary's County, Maryland. On January 
20, 1841, he secured license in the National Capital to marry Elizabeth 
Waters, born 1813 in Virginia, according to the census records.1 


Children of Thomas and Elizabeth (Waters) Smoot
1. Annie Smoot, born 1842, married Allan Goff. Issues: Rosa and 
Lucy. 
2. Albert Smoot, born 1844, d.s.p. in railroad accident. 
3. Thomas Edgar Smoot, married Lucy Willingham. q.v. 
4. George Henry Smoot, married Marion Manley. q.v. 
5. Lou Ellen Smoot, born 1850, died 1878. 
6. Addison Smoot, born 1852, married in Corinth, Miss., and settled 
in Texas. 
Thomas Loker Smoot did not accompany his parents to Alabama, but 
remained in Virginia until 1848. While enroute by water to join his father 
at Tuscumbia, his fourth child was born. The 1870 census shows him as a 
wagon maker and his birthplace as Maryland. He, his wife, and daughter 
were victims of the yellow-fever epidemic of Tuscumbia in 1878. The 
North Alabamian of October 22, that year, records the following: "Died 
on the 22nd Mrs. T. L. Smoot in the 56th year of her age", (the 1870 
census states her age as 57); the October 25 issue, "Died on the 23d, Miss 
Ellen Smoot in the 28th year of her age", "Mr. T. L. Smoot and Mrs. 
Manley are improving". Thomas Loker Smoot recovered and died 
several years later. 


HEZEKIAH SMOOT7
(1814 - 1898)
Hezekiah Smoot, son of Daniel Jenifer Smoot, was born July 4, 1814, 
according to one record at Knoxville, Tennessee, others cite North 
Carolina and Virginia. He accompanied his parents to Logan County, 
Virginia, and there he married Lucy B. Smith, born about 1824 in Wood 
County, Virginia, but whose parents were natives of Ireland. In 1850 he 
was the head of a family in Boone County, with his wife, an 8-month old 
son, and a number of his wife's relatives bearing the name of Smith. The 
following children were at home in 1860 or 1880--De Clifford, born 
1850; Richard, born 1855; W. T. (son), born 
1For the genealogy of the Waters Family, of Anne Arundel County, Md., 
see 
"Anne Arundel Gentry", by Newman. 

160

1862; and S. M. (son), born 1865. It is said that eight sons and one 
daughter were born. He died at the age of 84 years, and his wife at 83, 
both being buried at Marmet in Kanawha County. 


WILLIAM SMOOT7
(1816 - 18--)
William Smoot, son of Daniel Jenifer and Polly (Anderson) Smoot, was 
born about 1816 in Rowan County, North Carolina. He settled in Logan 
County, Virginia, with his parents and there about 1838 he married 
Martha A. de Jarrell, born 1820, in Iredell County, North Carolina. 


Children of William and Martha (de Jarrell) Smoot
1. Anne R. Smoot, born 1840. 
2. Victoria A. Smoot, born 1842, died young. 
3. Daniel Jenifer Smoot married Mary A. Atkins. q.v. 
4. John R. Smoot, born 1845, married Sarah D. ----, born 1845, 
in Va. Issues: William, Minty, Mary Ella, Flora, etc. 
5. William T. Smoot, born 1847, married Elizabeth Stallings, widow. 


ALEXANDER SMOOT7
(1821 - 18--)
Alexander Smoot, son of Daniel Jenifer and Polly (Anderson) Smoot, 
was born 1821 in North Carolina. He married Juliana ----, born 1823, in 
Kanawha County, Virginia. The following children were at home in 1860 
or 1880--Elizabeth P., born 1845; Wilmot J., born 1846; Mary Frances, 
born 1848; Julia, born 1849; Charles, born 1854; Alexander, born 1855; 
James, born 1857; Joseph, born 1861; Sophia, born 1864; Cornwell (?), 
born 1866; and Hezekiah, born 1869. 


SAMUEL SMOOT7
(1826 - 18--)
Samuel Smoot, son of Daniel Jenifer and Polly (Anderson) Smoot, was 
born 1826 in Logan County, Virginia. The following children were at 
home in 1860--Elizabeth G., born 1851; Rulian A., born 1853; and Polly 
F., born 1855. 


RICHARD SMOOT, C. S. A.7
(1832 - 1882)
Richard Smoot, son of Daniel Jenifer and Polly (Anderson) Smoot, was 
born 1832 in Logan County, Virginia. During the War Between the 
States he settled in Tazewell County, Virginia, about six miles from 

161

the county seat and in his native State he enlisted in the Confederate 
Army. On October 4, 1866, he married Eleanor White, born 1848 in 
Virginia, the daughter of Thomas White and Eleanor (Harrison) Witten. 
He died August 4, 1882; his widow died June 19, 1902. 


Children of Richard and Eleanor (Witten) Smoot
1. Samuel Rial Smoot, born 1868, unmarried. 
2. Eliza Smoot, born Oct. 1870, married Jan. 22, 1890, Thomas Neel. 
Issues: Annie; John Richard; Bess; Zelma; and Eleanor. 
3. Mary Marten Smoot. 
4. Thomas Richard Smoot married Apr. 16, 1902, Kate M. Litz. 
Issues: Thomas Richard; Frank Litz; Hettie Kathryn; and 
George Witten. 
5. Grace Smoot married Apr. 22, 1903, Troy M. Greear. Issues: John 
Richard; Sara Ella; and Peyton. 
6. Jenna White Peyton Smoot, unmarried. 
7. Essie Smoot married Feb. 4, 1903, Charles F. Brown. 


THOMAS EDGAR SMOOT8
Thomas Edgar Smoot, son of Thomas Loker and Elizabeth (Waters) 
Smoot, was born 1846 in Virginia. He married Lucy Willingham, and 
died in Florence, Alabama, where all of his children were born. He is 
interred in the city cemetery. 


Children of Thomas and Lucy (Willingham) Smoot
1. Lorena Smoot married Jesse Dowdy. 
2. Charles Bell Smoot, d.s.p. 
3. Robert Samuel Smoot, born Jan. 1, 1874, died Oct. 15, 1918, 
married Dec. 6, 1899, Minnie, dau. of William Henry and 
Frances Catherine Cromwell.(*) Issues: Edward Hunter, born 
Apr. 12, 1916, and 2 children died young. 
4. William Smoot married Nina Morrison and Otta Mae ----. 
Issue: (first) John. 
5. Rosella Smoot married Thomas Half. Issue: Kathlean. 


GEORGE HENRY SMOOT3
(1848 - 1905)
George Henry Smoot, son of Thomas Loker and Elizabeth (Waters) 
Smoot, was born September 28, 1848, on a vessel enroute to Alabama 
from Virginia. At Tuscumbia on December 27, 1876, he married his first 
cousin Marion Wallace, born September 30, 1848, at Tuscumbia, the 
daughter of Edward Washington and Margaret Loker (Smoot) 
(*)For the history and genealogy of the Cromwell Family of Maryland, 
see, 
"Anne Arundel Gentry", by Newman. 


162

Manley. He died 1905 at Tuscumbia; his widow died 1933 at Avondale, 
Colorado. 


Children of George Henry and Marion (Manley) Smoot
1. Irma Lorene Smoot, born Jan. 1878. 
2. Nellie May Smoot, born May 1880, married John Alfred Stout. 
3. Frank Newsum Smoot, born May 1882, d.s.p. 1908. 
4. Elizabeth Wilson Smoot, born Mar. 14, 1883, married Feb. 16, 
1908, at Tuscumbia, William Wesley, born Nov. 2, 1878, at 
Florence, son of Thomas and Martha Jane Anderson. 


DANIEL JENIFER SMOOT, C. S. A.8
(1843 - 1918)
Daniel Jenifer Smoot, son of William and Martha (de Jarrell) Smoot, was 
born 1843, in Boone County, Virginia. Although his section of Virginia 
had little sympathy with the Southern cause in 1861, Daniel Jenifer 
Smoot manifested the ideals of the old aristocracy of Maryland and 
Virginia, and as a lad of nineteen he enlisted in 1862 at Charleston in 
Company D, under Captain Lawson of the 36th Virginia Regiment, 
known as "Logan's Wild Cats", and attached most of the time to Early's 
Division. 
He figured conspicuously in the campaigns up and down the Shenandoah 
Valley and was with General Jubal Early in Maryland when the 
Confederates had the Federal Capital in consternation. He participated in 
seventeen general battles and was at Camp Lee, Richmond, when 
General Lee surrendered. After his furlough from the Confederate Army, 
he returned home to find much of the former wealth of his parents lost. 
He was a Democrat in politics and held several district and county offices 
in addition to his occupation of farming. 
About 1867 he married Mary A. Atkins, born about 1845, in Giles 
County, Virginia, whose parents were also natives of that State. He died 
in 1918; his widow died in 1928. 


Children of Daniel Jenifer and Mary (Atkins) Smoot
1. Walter W. Smoot, born Apr. 13, 1868, married Mary Mossena 
Griffith. Issues: Lester Boyd; Oma Alice; Lyda Jean; and 
Carlos Taylor. 
2. Edgar W. Smoot, born Mar. 29, 1870, died 1935, married Rosalie 
Zinn. 
3. Delmar A. Smoot, born Mar. 29, 1870, married Ora Vickers. 
4. Lagertie C. Smoot, born Feb. 28, 1872, married Wilburn W. Hall. 
Issues: Leland Stanford; Grace; and Edgar Rudolph. 
5. Bessie E. Smoot, born Apr. 22, 1877, married Mandyville J. 
Hopkins, Issues: Raymond Jackson and Murray. 

163



ALEXANDER SMOOT5
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
Alexander Smoot, son of John, was born August 1, 1769, in St. Mary's 
County, Maryland, where he was domiciled as the head of his household 
at the 1790 census, unmarried, with two slaves. Shortly after that year he 
migrated to Culpeper County, Virginia, then a county containing much 
unpatented land, and joined some of his brothers and nephews who had 
already settled there. On October 17, 1798, at the county seat he secured 
license to marry Anne (Jones) Hawkins, a widow with young children. 


Children of Alexander and Anne (Jones) Smoot
1. Thomas Smoot married ---- Holman. q.v. 
2. Alexander Smoot married Temperance Neely. q.v. 
3. Elizabeth Smoot, born Feb. 18, 1805. 
Alexander Smoot with his young family including his step-children 
migrated about 1806 to Rowan County, North Carolina, and established 
his seat on land which had formerly been owned by the parents of Daniel 
Boone. On January 12, 1807, he purchased from Frederick Thompson for 
œ400 land on Bear Creek, being a portion of a tract granted to a "certain 
Esquire Boon by the Lord Earl Granville". The conveyance was 
witnessed by William Nelson and William Smoot. On August 22, 1818, 
he instituted action against Thomas Ray for the erection of a mill on Bear 
Creek which flooded portions of his estate or as he stated in the petition 
"drowned my land". 
The will of Alexander Smoot was dated November 26, 1816, and proved 
at the February court of 1826 in Rowan County, North Carolina, by 
Littleberry R. Rose and William Nelson. He bequeathed his step-
daughter Sally Allen $50 which was her "full share" of her father's estate, 
likewise he bequeathed similar amounts to the other step-children--Polly, 
wife of Brice W. Ijams;1 John Hawkins; and William Hawkins. 
He devised his widow Nancy 200 acres of land, negroes, and all other 
personal property during life which at her death were to be divided 
between his two sons--Thomas and Alexander. Both sons received direct 
200 acres of land between them. He willed his daughter Elizabeth 
1For the Ijams family, see "Anne Arundel Gentry", by Newman. 

164

certain negroes. A codicil of December 3, 1825, directed that 16 negroes 
be divided among his three children. 
It is believed that he was interred in the burying ground of the old 
Presbyterian church once known as Joppa, lying about a mile north of the 
present town of Mocksville, where the parents of Daniel Boone and other 
early citizens were buried.2 


THOMAS SMOOT6
(1799 - 18--)
Thomas Smoot, son of Alexander and Anne (Jones) Smoot, was born 
August 31, 1799, in Culpeper County, Virginia. He migrated to North 
Carolina with his parents and there he married a daughter of Jacob 
Holman, of Rowan County. According to family tradition two children 
were born--Mary and John. 
On May 8, 1837, Thomas Smoot bought land lying on Dutchman's Creek 
in Davie County from William Hawkins. On March 28, 1843, he sold to 
Isaac Holman this land on Dutchman's Creek on which stood a saw and 
grist mill, his interest "being one-half subject to the dower of Catherine 
Linn, widow of John Linn". The deed was proved by Burgess Gaither 
and C. Hardin. 
On August 28, 1855, John A. Smoot, his son, conveyed to Isaac Holman 
for $50 "one-sixteenth portion of his grandfather's Jacob Holman 
undivided land". The deed was witnessed by Asberry Gaither. It is said 
that he is buried at Olive Branch Farm, near Farmington, North Carolina. 


ALEXANDER SMOOT6
(1801 - 1839)
Alexander Smoot, son of Alexander and Anne (Jones) Smoot, was born 
October 18, 1801, in Culpeper County, Virginia. He migrated with his 
parents to Rowan County, North Carolina, and there about 1827 he 
married Temperance, born May 22, 1810, daughter of Francis and Mary 
(Holman) Neely. 
It was traditional that the Neelys were from Ireland, however, Richard 
Neely and his family landed about 1760, supposedly at Philadelphia, 
where his ill wife, Mary Elizabeth Duncan, was transported to Rowan 
County, North Carolina, upon a litter suspended between two horses. In 
1782 Richard Neely was granted by the State 637 acres of land lying 
2If anyone knows of the final resting place of Alexander Smoot Sr. and 
his 
wife, Dr. J. Edward Smoot, of Concord, N. C., a descendant, would like 
to be 
advised. 

165

on Hunting Creek, where he ultimately constructed a substantial log 
house on the south bank about three miles above its confluence with the 
South Yadkin River and about one mile, as the crow flies, from the 
present day Byerly's Chapel and graveyard. Today may be seen a large 
pile of rough stones which once formed the chimney and foundation, and 
nearby still flows a rock-bottomed spring which no doubt furnished 
drinking water to the plantation. 
Of several children born to Richard Neely and Mary Elizabeth his wife, 
Francis was probably their eldest child who distinguished himself during 
the Revolutionary War. As a youth he served in the Continental Army in 
the capacity of wagoner, especially in comradeship with his friend ---- 
Guffy in collecting horses for the Army. 
In 1781 following the American victory at Cowpens, Generals Greene 
and Morgan considered it inexpedient to meet Lord Cornwallis so 
consequently they marched northward with the British in hot pursuit. On 
reaching the Yadkin River at Trading Ford, several miles below the 
present town of Spencer, Greene and Morgan rushed across the Yadkin 
after which the river on account of recent rains rose to such a height that 
it became impossible for the British Army to ford it. A small detachment 
of the Continental forces, however, was left behind on the south bank of 
the Yadkin to guard some wagons and stores. Around midnight the 
advance guard of the British Army under General O'Hara and Colonel 
Tarleton reached the Yadkin and located the small American force, but 
believing it to be the main Continental Army, the British quickly retired 
to Salisbury where they encamped for a few days. In the meanwhile the 
Americans in some manner crossed the swollen river, and found 
themselves at the plantation of Richard Neely, cold, wet, and hungry. 
Here they were furnished a wagon filled with supplies of foodstuffs, 
home-woven jeans, and according to family tradition hometailored pants. 
Ultimately when the advance guard of the British Army reached 
Renshaw's Ford, they found Francis Neely, a youth of twenty years, and 
his comrade Guffy with a drove of seventeen horses which they had 
collected for the Continental forces. The British fired upon them and 
mortally wounded Guffy, but Neely escaped unharmed, and knowing the 
country he escaped into canebrakes and the river jungles and hid until 
darkness. That night he swam the Yadkin and reached his home on 
Hunting Creek in safety. 
For the patriotic services of Francis Neely during the Revolution, he was 
awarded by various accounts currency in the excess of œ150.3 
3North Carolina Historical Commission, Raleigh. 


166

He later served as a magistrate of the District Court of Rowan County, 
and was active in this capacity during the War of 1812. He died in North 
Carolina, and was buried at what was formerly called the Van Eaton 
graveyard, now known as Byerly's Chapel. 
By his will dated November 10, 1828, he bequeathed to his daughter, 
Temperance Smoot, "Harden Orton" and "Beard's Place", containing 600 
acres on the north side of the South Yadkin River adjacent to the lands of 
Samuel Thomas. 


Children of Alexander and Temperance (Neely) Smoot
1. Alexander Neely Smoot married Sarah ----. q.v. 
2. James Franklin Smoot married Virginia Brittingham. q.v. 
3. Ann Elizabeth Smoot, born Jan. 9, 1832, died circa 1868, married 
John W. Turner, C. S. A., License May 30, 1855, Davie Co. 
Issues: Mary Elizabeth; Laura; Alexander Smoot; and Joseph. 
4. Nathan Smoot married Lou Cheshire. q.v. 
5. Rebecca Providence Smoot, born Mar. 22, 1837, died Aug. 18, 1890, 
married William Monroe Dayvault. License Oct. 9, 1854, Davie 
Co. Issues: David Patton, born July 5, 1857; Alexander Smoot, 
born Jan. 2, 1860; Virginia Temperance, born Jan. 9, 1862; Lelia 
Elizabeth, born July 16, 1866; James Franklin, born Oct. 20, 
1868; Meek Anne, born Nov. 25, 1871; William Arthur, born 
25, 1874; Mary Rebecca, born June 12, 1876; and Andrew Jackson, 
born Jan. 6, 1879. 
6. Mary Smoot, born Oct. 31, 1840, died Apr. 10, 1911, married Sanford 
Henley. Issues: Alexander Smoot; John Chillian; Joseph 
Hawkins; Pearl; and Francis. 
In his early life Alexander Smoot was by profession a cabinet maker, 
which it is believed was taught him by his father. Some of his handicraft 
is still in the possession of his descendants, which show that he was not 
only a cabinet maker but a wood carver as well--especially the delicately 
carved hair on lion's feet supporting the superimposed pieces of his 
workmanship. Later he devoted his life to that of a merchant and planter 
at a place still remembered as County Line located on the line separating 
what was then Rowan (now Davie) County from Iredell. 
Shortly after his marriage Alexander Smoot constructed on the land 
which he had inherited from his father-in-law on the north side of the 
South Yadkin River, a spacious and quaint log house about three miles 
from County Line. This house was originally built for the temporary use 
of him and his family until he was able to erect a large, manorial-like 
brick dwelling like his forefathers had built in old Maryland. The then 
log house was to be used as a dormitory for the slaves, but an early death 
prevented this vision from materialization. 


167

At one end of the log house was a tall chimney of brick, and in front was 
a large front porch with stone steps, capped with halves of discarded 
circular stones which had been used formerly to crush fruits in making 
brandy. Nearby was the smoke house, granary, and apple house. The 
grounds were noted for the old towering elms, while at the foot of the 
hill, surrounded by giant oaks, was the spring-house. In the northwest 
corner of the garden grew the largest apple tree known to the countryside 
which had sprung from a seed planted by Temperance from some fall or 
winter apples which Alexander had brought home. Instead of bearing fall 
apples, as expected, it was a profuse bearer of midsummer fruit of the so-
called sheep-nose variety. 
With the aid of a large number of slaves, Alexander Smoot bridged the 
South Yadkin and cultivated his extensive plantation which lay on both 
sides of the river. He fenced his broad fields with many thousands of oak 
rails, built into zig-zag style ten rails high, and above which was added 
an eleventh rail placed into the crotches of the stakes crossed like the 
letter X, and which was called the rider rail to prevent jumping stock 
from disregarding the barriers between green pastures and fields of grain. 
In May 1829, Alexander Smoot purchased 200 acres of land from 
Caswell Harbin and his wife. On August 14, 1830, he and his wife 
Temperance conveyed to Arthur Neely 36 acres of land, being their share 
of the landed estate of Nathan Neely, deceased. During the same month 
he was named by the court guardian to Columbus Price, the son of 
William. In February 1831, he sold land on Third Creek to Robert N. 
Fleming, and in May of the same year, when he made another 
conveyance he declared in court that his wife was "not capable of coming 
to court." 
On January 21, 1834, he deeded land to the trustees of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church for the erection of a "house of worship", receiving one 
dollar in hand to consummate the transaction. Upon the land was built a 
spacious edifice of large hewn logs, weather-boarded outside and 
finished inside. From the three doors on three sides of the building led 
aisles that crossed in front of an old-time high-box pulpit. From the 
ground floor led two stairways to a gallery for the slaves who always 
accompanied their masters and mistresses to services. The old edifice can 
now be considered a memorial to Alexander Smoot, where a monument 
has been erected to his memory, on which are chiseled the names of the 
first Board of Trustees. 
Early in the spring of 1840 Alexander Smoot went on a business trip to 
Illinois in the covered wagon of that day, and returned with a heavy 


168

cold which deepened into pneumonia. He closed his eyes to the scenes of 
this earth and was interred in the churchyard of the South River Church, 
two miles from his home on the south bank of the South Yadkin. 
Temperance Smoot survived her husband many years, raising her young 
children to manhood, and died on June 21, 1897. Her will was dated May 
21, 1887, and proved in Davie County during July 1897. She willed her 
daughter Mary Henley the home plantation on which she was living, on 
the north side of the South Yadkin River, adjoining the land of John 
Turner and W. S. Smoot, the tract containing 244 acres. To her daughter 
Rebecca Dayvault she devised land on the south side of the Yadkin River 
in Rowan County, consisting of 150 acres, adjacent to J. F. Smoot and 
others. She mentioned her sons James F. and W. S. Smoot. Bequests 
were also made to the heirs of her sons A. N. Smoot and Nathan Smoot, 
and to the following grandchildren--Mary Micenhammer, Laura R. 
Shoaf, Alexander S. Turner, and Joseph F. Turner. 


ALEXANDER NEELY SMOOT, C. S. A.7
(1828 - 186-)
Alexander Neely Smoot, son of Alexander and Temperance (Neely) 
Smoot, was born December 27, 1828, in Rowan County, North Carolina. 
He migrated to Arkansas, where he married Sarah ----. During the Civil 
War he served in Company I, 27th Regiment of Arkansas Infantry, and 
either died or was killed in service. None of his children ever visited their 
father's birthplace, but a son John, a very handsome youth, about 1880 
send his photograph to his paternal grandmother. 


REV. JAMES FRANKLIN SMOOT7
(1831 - 1904)
James Franklin Smoot, son of Alexander and Temperance (Neely) 
Smoot, was born March 13, 1813, in that part of Rowan County which in 
1836 became Davie County, North Carolina. He became a minister of the 
Methodist Church South and held charges in his native State. 
His wife was Virginia, born September 18, 1838, at Portsmouth, 
Virginia, the daughter of William Powell and Martha (Smith) 
Brittingham. His Bible reads that the marriage occurred January 3, 1861, 
"rites of matrimony solemnized by the Rev. P. A. Peterson, of the 
Virginia Conference". Her father died in 1855 during the yellow fever 
epidemic of Norfolk. 

169



Children of James and Virginia (Brittingham) Smoot
1. Alexander Lee Smoot married Daisy Meroney Hodgins. q.v. 
2. William Brittingham Smoot married Eva Cheatham. q.v. 
3. James Edward Smoot married Minnie May Watson. q.v. 
4. Frank Neely Smoot, born Aug. 26, 1869, d.s.p. Feb. 10, 1895. 
5. Marvin LeRoy Smoot married Margaret Giddens. q.v. 
6. Cora Virginia Smoot, born Oct. 24, 1880, died spinster June 9, 1923. 
His wife died July 7, 1901, at Salisbury, and was buried at the South 
River Church. Her tomb reads "For forty years the faithful wife of an 
itinerant preacher. A loving disposition, a cheerful nature, a devoted wife 
and mother--hath left an inheritance upon the earth, the good effects of 
which can only be determined by eternity". 
His death occurred November 3, 1904, at Concord, and his remains were 
interred at South River Church, the shrine of his ancestors. The following 
inscription appears on his tombstone--"An active member of the North 
Carolina Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, from 
1856 to 1876, after which time a faithful local preacher till the end". The 
Salisbury Post stated that "no task too hard, no burden too heavy, no 
sacrifice too great . . . that is the record of this great old man who fell on 
sleep this morning". 


NATHAN SMOOT, C. S. A.7
(1835 - 1863)
Nathan Smoot, son of Alexander and Temperance (Neely) Smoot, was 
born March 24, 1835, in old Rowan County, North Carolina. His wife 
was Lou Cheshire. 


Children of Nathan and Lou (Cheshire) Smoot
1. Neely Smoot. 
2. Walter Smoot, born 1857, married Maggie Steel, born 1867. 
License Davie Co., N. C., Nov. 1, 1893. 
3. Mattie Smoot, born 1862, married Henry Dwiggins, born 1859. 
License Davie Co., N. C., Jan. 8, 1880. 
At the beginning of the War Between the States, Nathan Smoot enlisted 
in Company G, Seventh Confederate Cavalry, Claiborne's Regiment, 
Partisian Rangers. He was received at the hospital at Goldsboro, North 
Carolina, on September 14, 1863, where he died shortly afterwards of 
"disease", according to the records of the Adjutant General's Office. His 
brother, James, brought his remains to his home, where they were buried 
at the South River Churchyard. 

170



ALEXANDER LEE SMOOT8
Alexander Lee Smoot, son of James Franklin and Virginia (Brittingham) 
Smoot, was born February 17, 1864, at Jonesville, North Carolina. In his 
early life he taught school at Salado, Texas. He married Mrs. Daisy 
Meroney Hodgins, of Salisbury, by whom one son was born--Alexander 
Lee II. He was for many years the Register of Deeds for Rowan County, 
and one-time Mayor of Salisbury. At present he maintains a realty and 
insurance office at Salisbury. 


WILLIAM BRITTINGHAM SMOOT8
(1865 - 1911)
William Brittingham Smoot, was born November 4, 1865, in Jonesville, 
North Carolina, the son of James Franklin and Virginia (Brittingham) 
Smoot. For many years he was manager of the mercantile firm of Smoot 
Bros. & Rogers, of Salisbury, but because of ill health he retired from 
business, studied law, and was graduated from the University of North 
Carolina. He practiced his profession at Salisbury until a few days before 
his death, which occurred in New York City at a private nursing home on 
June 23, 1911, as a result of a surgical operation. He was survived by his 
widow, who was formerly Eva Cheatham, of Oxford, and two children--
one of whom was William Jr., now of Arizona. 


DR. JAMES EDWARD SMOOT8
James Edward Smoot, son of James Franklin and Virginia (Brittingham) 
Smoot, was born January 1, 1868, at the old log house on the South 
Yadkin River during the midst of a bleak snowstorm. In 1893 he was 
graduated from the Baltimore Medical College, of Baltimore, Maryland, 
and practiced his profession until 1920 when he retired from active 
service. Since his retirement he has engaged in historical research and is 
the author of several well-known publications. In 1929 after exhaustive 
research he published "Marshal Ney Before and After Execution" which 
has been favorably received by critics at home and abroad. His next 
publication will be the "History of Cabarrus County, North Carolina". 
On December 12, 1894, he married Minnie May Watson, of Salisbury, 
by whom four children were born--James Watson; Virginia Lawrence; 
Annis Brittingham who married Robert Lynn Trout and have Annis and 
Brittingham; and Mary Donnell who married Thomas Green Croom. 


171

It is interesting to note that his son, James Watson, while he was 
attending Trinity College at Durham, about 1916 spent the Christmas 
holidays at the home of his college-mate, Clinton Smoot, in Alexandria, 
Virginia. At this occasion he met a great many of his distant cousins, one 
of whom was the very aged grandmother who said that when she was a 
girl she had a sweetheart by the name of Alexander Smoot who moved 
south. 


JAMES WATSON SMOOT9
James Watson Smoot, only son of Dr. James Edward Smoot and Minnie 
May Watson his wife, was born in North Carolina and received his 
education at Trinity College (now Duke University), at Durham. During 
the World War he served as 2nd Lieutenant of the 324th United States 
Infantry, 81st Division, A. E. F. He married Catherine Cobb, of Norfolk, 
Virginia. 


DR. MARVIN LE ROY SMOOT8
(1876 - 1923)
Marvin Le Roy Smoot, son of James Franklin and Virginia (Brittingham) 
Smoot, was born August 24, 1876, at Cool Springs, North Carolina. He 
married Margaret Giddens, of Goldsboro, by whom two children were 
born--Margaret and Marvin Le Roy II. 
He was graduated from the University College of Medicine at Richmond, 
and for a few years he successfully practiced his profession in Salisbury 
and Spencer. He later specialized in the diseases of the eye, ear, and 
throat with his college mate Dr. James M. Lilly. He died at Fayetteville, 
North Carolina, on February 6, 1923, where he is interred. 


REV. THOMAS ARTHUR SMOOT8
Thomas Arthur Smoot, son of James Franklin and Virginia (Brittingham) 
Smoot, was born March 8, 1871, in Olin, North Carolina. He married 
Leila Gilchrist McGirt, of Wilmington, North Carolina. Three children 
have been born--Thomas Arthur; Edward Brittingham; and Mary Lily. 
He was graduated from Trinity College, North Carolina, entered the 
ministry of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, and at present (1936) 
is the pastor of the Epworth Church at Norfolk, Virginia. 


172



ABRAHAM OWEN SMOOT7
AND
HIS DESCENDANTS
Abraham Owen Smoot, son of George and Anne (Rowlett) Smoot, was 
born February 7, 1815, at "Pleasant Home" in what is now Owen County, 
Kentucky. His father died when he was less than six years of age. His 
mother in 1835 became a convert to the Mormon Church through the 
influence of missionaries who were then traveling in northern Kentucky. 
On March 22, 1835, he was baptized in the faith by Elder Warren 
Parrish. In the fall of 1836, he visited Kirkland, Ohio, and soon 
afterwards assisted in organizing and leading a group of converts from 
Kentucky to the community then at Far West, Missouri. 
When the State militia and a mob of Westerners captured the settlement 
in Missouri, Abraham Smoot was made a prisoner. At this time, 
November 11, 1838, he married his first wife, Margaret Thompson 
(McMeans) Atkinson, born in South Carolina, the daughter of Anthony 
and Esther Hunter McMeans, of Chester County, South Carolina. Her 
father was a native of that State, while her mother was born in Scotland. 
By her first husband William Cochrane Atkinson, she had one son, 
William Cochrane Atkinson (q.v.), who took the name of Smoot upon his 
adoption by his step-father. No children were born to this first union. 
On January 9, 1846, Abraham Owen Smoot married his second and third 
wives--Sarah Gibbens, born October 20, 1800, in Cumberland County, 
Kentucky, and Emily Hill, born November 25, 1816, in Pendelton 
District, of South Carolina, the daughter of John and Martha (Carlin) 
Hill, then the widow of Zachariah Harris. 


Children of Abraham and Emily (Hill) Smoot
2. Albert Ether Smoot, born 1847, d.s.p. 
3. Emily Anne Smoot, born 1851, died spinster. 
4. Margaret Thompson Smoot, born Aug. 27, 1854, died Apr. 21, 1932, 
married Nov. 25, 1874, Wilson Howard, son of Mahlon and 
Aurilla (Coray) Dusenberry, born Apr. 7, 1841, Pike Co., Ill., 
died Mar. 20, 1925, Issues: Abraham Owen, born Dec. 5, 1875; 
Lorena, born Apr. 3, 1878; Ada, born Apr. 6, 1881; Cora Emily, 
born Sept. 13, 1883; Eva, born Jan. 23, 1887; and Edith, born 
May 16, 1891. 
5. Zina Beal Smoot, born Feb. 20, 1859, died May 20, 1900, married 
Dec. 18, 1879, Orson Ferguson, born July 1, 1855, died May 16, 


1931, son of Horace Kimball and Helen Mar (Kimball) Whitney. 
Issues: Horace Newel, born Oct. 27, 1880; Heber K., born 
June 3, 1882; Emily, born Jan. 29, 1885; Helen Mar, born Aug. 
1, 1887; Margaret, born Aug. 24, 1889; Charles Byron, born July 
3, 1891; Albert Owen, born Sept. 15, 1893; Paul Van Cott, born 
Apr. 24, 1899; and Virginia Clayton, born Apr. 24, 1899. 
Abraham Owen Smoot took as his fourth wife, Diana Tanner Eldredge, 
born March 28, 1837, Marion County, Indiana, daughter of Ira and 
Nancy (Black) Eldredge. Her father was a native of New York, while her 
mother was of Maryland birth. 


Children of Abraham and Diana (Eldredge) Smoot
5. Abraham Owen Smoot married twice. q.v. 
6. Nancy Diana Smoot, born June 7, 1858, married Sept. 1, 1881, 
David Rogers, born May 4, 1854, died June 29, 1928, son of 
George and Hester (Rogers) Beebe. Issues: George Owen, born 
Aug. 12, 1882; Reba Luella, born May 29, 1885; Calvin Eldredge, 
born Dec. 21, 1889; Joseph Ellwood, born Oct. 12, 1890; and 
Hester Diana, born Mar. 20, 1895. 
7. Olive Smoot, born Feb. 10, 1860, married Oct. 18, 1876, James 
William Bean, born Nov. 19, 1853, son of James Addison and 
Harriet Catherine (Fausett) Bean. Issues: Luella, born Oct. 8, 
1877; Estella, born Oct. 8, 1877; William Cullen, born May 4, 
1879; Diana, born Feb. 7, 1881; Harriet Virginia, born Nov. 1, 
1883; Pauline, born Oct. 9, 1885; Azua, born Aug. 22, 1887; Margaret, 
born Dec. 6, 1888; Ross Smoot, born Mar. 17, 1890; Lee 
Addison, born Aug. 12, 1891; Orea, born June 6, 1894; Ruth, 
born June 8, 1896; Seth, born Oct. 8, 1897; George Elmer, born 
Apr. 13, 1899; and Joseph Wayne, born Oct. 25, 1900. 
8. Elizabeth Smoot, born Dec. 7, 1861, died Dec. 13, 1932; married 
Oct. 16, 1879, Milton Henry Hardy, born Sept. 17, 1845, Essex 
Co., Mass., died Aug. 23, 1905, son of Josiah and Sarah (Parker) 
Hardy. Issues: Avera, born Feb. 21, 1882; Thethe Ina, born 
Aug. 1, 1888; Milton Oro, born July 27, 1890; LeGrand Haven, 
born June 13, 1894; and Morrow Smoot, born Aug. 22, 1897. 
9. Ella Deseret Smoot, born Aug. 23, 1869, died Oct. 20, 1916, married 
May 25, 1892, George Edgar Robison, born Aug. 3, 1869, died 
Feb. 10, 1926, son of Joseph Vickery and Martha Jane (Olmstead) 
Robison. Issues: Arnold Edgar, born Aug. 4, 1894; and 
Joseph Smoot, born June 8, 1902. 
10. Vilate Smoot, born Nov. 30, 1874, married Jan. 4, 1893, Thomas 
Fairclough Pierpont, born Sept. 16, 1870, son of Thomas and 
Naomi (King) Pierpont. Issues: Pauline Diana, born Mar. 8, 
1894; child, born and died 1896; Clifford Smoot, born May 7, 
1897; Naomi, born Dec. 26, 1899; Clarence, born 1900; Vilate, 
born Jan. 3, 1902; Margaret, born Nov. 10, 1904; Thomas 


174

George, born Dec. 21, 1906; Ruth, born Feb. 28, 1908; and John 
Barney, born June 1, 1910. 
11. Orson Parley Smoot married twice. q.v. 
12. Horace Alma Smoot married Edna Louise Stubbs. q.v. 
Abraham Owen Smoot took for his fifth wife Anna Kirstine, born 
December 19, 1833, at Onsoien, Norway, the daughter of Morris Oversen 
and Anna (Sorensen) Morrison. 


Children of Abraham and Anna (Morrison) Smoot
13. Anna Christina Smoot, born June 7, 1858, died Mar. 2, 1904, 
married Feb. 9, 1882, George Shepard Taylor, born July 16, 
1860, died Jan. 16, 1924, son of George Hamilton and Anstis 
Elmina (Shepard) Taylor. Issues: Ethel, born Dec. 25, 1882; 
Hazel, born Dec. 25, 1882; George Merle, born Oct. 17, 1888; 
Elmina Smoot, born Sept. 8, 1890; Anna Kirstina, born July 9, 
1895; Miriam May, born May 27, 1898. 
14. Alice Smoot, born Feb. 6, 1860, married Myron Clark Newell, born 
Sept. 26, 1856, son of Elliot Afred and Maria Louisa (Roberts) 
Newell. Issues: Myron Clark, born June 25, 1880; Clyde Smoot, 
born Sept. 29, 1882; Flora, born Jan. 13, 1885; Emma, born 
Sept. 10, 1886; Annie born Nov. 10, 1888; Morris, born May 5, 
1890; Alice, born Sept. 18, 1892; Mary, born Nov. 15, 1894; 
Helen, born Dec. 28, 1896; and Afton, born Mar. 5, 1899. 
15. Reed Smoot married twice. q.v. 
16. George Morrison Smoot married Mary Ann Larson. q.v. 
17. Agnes Mary Smoot, born July 3, 1866, married Sept. 28, 1887, 
Charles Albert, born July 27, 1865, son of Charles Dean and 
Martha Jane (Dusenberry) Glazier. Issues: Charles Wilson, 
born Sept. 1, 1888; Maline, born Apr. 20, 1890; Martha, born 
Sept. 12, 1892; Forrest Smoot, born July 7, 1894; Nyle, born 
Apr. 11, 1900; Dorothy, born Jan. 31, 1902; and Helen, born 
Sept. 12, 1907. 
18. Brigham Roland Smoot married Margaret Annella Nesbit. q.v. 
19. Ida Maline Smoot, born May 5, 1873, married Apr. 29, 1891, 
George Albert, born Nov. 6, 1867, son of Warren Newton and 
Adelaide Elizabeth (Webb) Dusenberry. Issues: Earle Smoot, 
born Feb. 1, 1892; and Margaret Alice, born July 23, 1895. 
In 1847 Abraham Smoot was the leader of the third company to enter 
Salt Lake Valley, the largest that year, consisting of 120 wagons. He 
became one of the leading forces in the colony and church, establishing 
his domicile at Provo, Utah County. 
Margaret, his first wife, died September 1, 1884, and was interred in 
Provo. Emily died March 20, 1882. Anna his last wife died January 20, 
1894. Abraham Smoot died at Provo on March 6, 1895, leaving one 
widow--Diana who survived until January 29, 1914. 

175



WILLIAM COCHRANE ADKINSON SMOOT8
(1828 - 1920)
William Cochrane Adkinson Smoot, adopted son of Abraham Owen 
Smoot and actual son of William and Margaret (McMeans) Adkinson, 
was born January 30, 1828, in Roane County, Tennessee. He was 
baptized in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints on February 
8, 1836, and participated in the persecutions of his people in Far West, 
Missouri, and Nauvoo, Illinois, where in January 1846, he was ordained 
a Seventy of the Church. As a member of the first pioneer company, he 
entered the Sale Lake Valley in July 1847. 
On January 29, 1852, he married Martha Ann, daughter of Peregrine and 
Julia Ann (Killgore) Sessions, who was born September 22, 1835, in 
Oxford County, Maine. 


Children of William and Martha Ann (Sessions) Smoot
1. William C. A. Smoot married Mary Ann Sarah Jones. q.v. 
2. Martha Ann Smoot, born 1854, died 1867. 
3. Abraham Owen Smoot, born 1857, died 1876. 
4. Margaret Esther Smoot, born Oct. 9, 1858, died Mar. 10, 1908. 
5. Julia Eliza Smoot, born July 24, 1860, married John Derring. 
6. Josephine Smoot, born Jan. 17, 1862, married Nephi Huskinson. 
7. Lucinda Smoot, born 1864, died 1876. 
8. Albert Carlos Smoot married Mary Evalyn Fisger. q.v. 
9. Louisa Thompson Smoot, born 1867, died 1889. 
10. Linnia Amanda Smoot, born 1869, died 1885. 
11. Sarah Emma Smoot, born Aug. 1, 1871, died Jan. 20, 1892, married 
Brigham LeRay Decker. 
12. Peregrine Smoot married Sarah Ellen Worthen. q.v. 
13. Wilson Parley Smoot, born Jan. 31, 1875. 
14. Phillipine Smoot, born Dec. 31, 1876. 
William Smoot married secondly June 21, 1857, Margaret Phoebe, 
daughter of John and Nancy Beal (Smoot) Freeman, who was born 
September 27, 1840, in Johnson County, Illinois. 


Children of William and Margaret (Freeman) Smoot
15. John Woodruff Smoot married Catherine Aurelia King. q.v. 
William Smoot took for his third wife Mahala, born February 4, 1840, in 
Sandusky County, Ohio, the daughter of Philip James and Mary (Vogt) 
Garn. The marriage occurred on February 3, 1877. She had married 
previously on April 1, 1858, Daniel Garn who died in 1870, leaving her a 
widow with five children. She herself drove a team across the plains to 
Utah in 1855. 

176


Children of William and Mahala (Garn) Smoot
16. Rhoda Ellis Smoot, born Jan. 16, 1878, died Mar. 29, 1900. 
17. Wilford Hunter Smoot, born May 11, 1880. 
18. William Thompson Smoot, born June 30, 1882, married May 30, 
1908, ----. Issues: Myrtle, born and died 1915. and Beth W., 
born Aug. 12, 1916. 
William Smoot ultimately established his home in Sugar House Ward of 
Salt Lake City, where he served as Counselor in the Bishopric, and as a 
Bishop of the Church from 1866 to 1877. Prior to this event in 1855 he 
filled a mission to the Indians, and later was a missionary for two years 
in the Southern States. 
His first wife, Martha Ann, died in Sugar House, Salt Lake City, on 
January 12, 1877. He continued to reside in Salt Lake City until his death 
which occurred on January 31, 1920. His third wife, Mahala, survived 
until April 3, 1922. His second wife married Joseph Warren Damron on 
February 16, 1862, and became the mother of ten children. She died 
October 30, 1930, in Delta, Millard County, Utah. 


ABRAHAM OWEN SMOOT8
(1856 - 1911)
Abraham Owen Smoot, son of Abraham and Diana (Eldredge) Smoot, 
was born March 11, 1856, at Salt Lake City, Utah. He married first 
Electa, daughter of Isaac and Electa (Wood) Bullock, on October 30, 
1878. She had been born on March 6, 1859, at Provo, Utah. 


Children of Abraham and Electa (Bullock) Smoot
1. Abraham Owen Smoot married Phoebe Jemina Campbell. q.v. 
2. Isaac Albert Smoot married Nettie Smart Parkinson. q.v. 
3. Allie Smoot, born Apr. 3, 1882, married June 22, 1910, Jacob 
Coleman, 
born Jan. 20, 1879. Issues: Aline, born July 2, 1911; child, 
born and died 1913; Robert Smoot, born June 13, 1915; Martha, 
Nov. 1, 1916; James Milan, born Feb. 4, 1919; Sherman, born 
Dec. 5, 1922; and Genevieve, born Apr. 9, 1925. 
4. Electa LaPreal Smoot, born Sept. 25, 1883. married Aug. 26, 1903. 
LeRoy, born Aug. 16, 1881, son of Henry A. and Sarah (De 
Gray) Dixon. Issues: Leroy Smoot, born Nov. 19, 1904; Paul 
Smoot, born Apr. 17, 1906; Allie, born Apr. 15, 1909; Sarah 
Vera, born Mar. 11, 1911; Mauine, born Oct. 7, 1913; Helen, born 
July 22, 1915; Arthur Smoot, born Nov. 5, 1918. 
5. Fern Smoot, born Mar. 23, 1885, married Sept. 9, 1908, Wells 
Lovett, born Apr. 26, 1882, son of George H. and Alsina (Wilkins) 
Brimhall. Issues: Sina, born June 5, 1910; Wells Smoot, 
born July 19, 1914; and Victor Owen, born Dec. 26, 1921. 
6. Ethel Smoot, born 1887, died circa 1889. 

177


His first wife died April 18, 1887. He married secondly on June 2, 1894, 
Zina Melinda, born December 30, 1870, Springville, Utah, the daughter 
of Don Carlos and Melinda (Singleton) Huntington. 


Children of Abraham and Zina (Huntington) Smoot
7. Erma Maxine Smoot, born May 14, 1895. 
Abraham Owen Smoot was active in civic affairs, and a prominent 
Democrat in his State, serving as county assessor and collector, city 
councilman, State senator, and United States commissioner. He died at 
Provo City, on May 22, 1911. His widow survived until January 19, 
1922. 


ORSON PARLEY SMOOT8
(1876 - 1936)
Orson Parley Smoot, son of Abraham Owen and Diana (Eldredge) 
Smoot, was born May 15, 1876, in Provo City, Utah. He married 
Alexandrina Snell. 


Children of Orson and Alexandrina (Snell) Smoot
1. Wendell McMeans Smoot married Rebecca Clawson. q.v. 
On February 21, 1906, he married secondly Ellen, born July 13, 1877, at 
American Fork, Utah, the daughter of John and Anna (Hansen) Conder, 
and the widow of Edward W. Broadbent. 


Children of Orson and Ellen (Conder) Smoot
2. Cleo Hannah Smoot, born Feb. 19, 1907. 
3. Douglas P. Smoot, born Jan. 1, 1909, married Jennie Hollam, q.v. 
4. Conder Eldredge Smoot, born May 25, 1912, married Phyllis 
Worthen, born Aug. 6, 1909. 
5. Helen Ella Smoot, born July 27, 1916. 
Orson Smoot was educated at the Brigham Young University at Provo, 
and was one-time manager of the Smoot Lumber Company. He died at 
Salt Lake City on January 13, 1936. 


HORACE ALMA SMOOT8
Horace Alma Smoot, son of Abraham Owen and Diana Tanner 
(Eldredge) Smoot, was born October 22, 1880, at Provo, Utah. On June 
11, 1902, he married Edna Louise, born September 5, 1880, at Provo, the 
daughter of Peter and Anne (Wride) Stubbs. 

178



Children of Horace and Edna Louise (Stubbs) Smoot
1. Alma Vivian Smoot, born Apr. 21, 1903, married June 23, 1926, 
Martha, born April, 22, 1903, dau. of William and Alice 
(Walker) Millard. Issues: Martha Jean, born July 21, 1927; 
Robert Alma, born Jan. 1, 1929; Alene, born June 20, 1930; Joan, 
born Mar. 7, 1932; Rulon Le Grand, born Feb. 14, 1934; and 
William Horace, born Oct. 28, 1935. 
2. Edgar Stubbs Smoot, born Apr. 17, 1905, married Sept. 7, 1927, 
Dora Millard, born Apr. 14, 1905, dau. of William J. and Alice 
(Walker) Millard. Issues: Harold Edgar, born Nov. 19, 1928; 
Stanley Millard, born Sept. 23, 1930; and Carol Dean, born Apr. 
6, 1935. 
3. Diana Smoot, born Nov. 6, 1908, married June 5, 1929, James 
Leslie Turner. Issues: Diana, born Sept. 20, 1930, and Shirley 
Gay, born Sept. 22, 1934. 
4. Maurine Smoot, born Jan. 1, 1911. 
5. Edna Louise Smoot, born May 8, 1913. 
6. Richard Eldredge Smoot, born Feb. 21, 1916. 
7. Horace Neldon Smoot, born Nov. 14, 1919. 
8. Dona Fay Smoot, born Oct. 20, 1925. 


HON. REED SMOOT8
Reed Smoot, son of Abraham Owen and Anna Kirstine (Morrison) 
Smoot, was born January 10, 1862, at Salt Lake City, Utah. On 
September 17, 1884, he married Alpha May, born August 6, 1863, at Salt 
Lake City, the daughter of Horace Sunderlin and Chloe Antoinette 
(Redfield) Eldredge. 


Children of Reed and Alpha May (Eldredge) Smoot
1. Harold Reed Smoot married Alice Nibley. q.v. 
2. Chloe Smoot, born Dec. 4, 1888, married Aug. 24, 1910, Ariel 
Frederick, 
born June 26, 1880, son of Thomas Barthelemie and Lucie 
(Smith) Cardon. Issues: Reed Smoot, born Aug. 12, 1911; 
John Ariel, born Oct. 26, 1915; and Robert Leroy, born June 25, 
1919. 
3. Seth Eldredge Smoot, born and died 1891. 
4. Harlow Eldredge Smoot married Anita Parkinson. q.v. 
5. Anne Kirstine Smoot, born Jan. 16, 1893, married Sept. 17, 1913, 
Grover Augustus, born Aug. 25, 1890, son of Henry August and 
Carrie A. (Nelson) Rebentisch. Issues: Hamilton Smoot, born 
Mar. 31, 1916; Anne K., born Nov. 11, 1921; and Grover Reed, 
born Feb. 5, 1925. 
6. Zella Esther Smoot, born Jan. 15, 1900, married Oct. 4, 1920, 
Carlyle, born Aug. 20, 1895, son of President Charles Wilson 
Nibley and Julia Budge his wife. Issues: Carlyle, born May 9, 
1923; Reed Smoot, born Feb. 7, 1926; and Owen Smoot. 
7. Ernest Winder Smoot married Martha Gehring. q.v. 


179


He served as a missionary to Great Britain in 1890 and 1891, and as 
counselor to President Edward Partridge of the Utah Stake from 1895 to 
1900. On April 8, of the latter year he was ordained an Apostle of the 
Church by President Lorenzo Snow. 
On January 20, 1903, Reed Smoot was elected to the United States 
Senate by the Legislature of Utah. Formal protests were signed by a 
group of citizens of Salt Lake City, demanding his expulsion from the 
Senate on the grounds that he was a Mormon Apostle and a believer in 
polygamy. The case soon assumed national attention. Thousands of 
petitions and protests signed by religious organizations and women's 
associations poured in from all parts of the United States. From January 
16, 1904, to June 11, 1906, his case was before the Senate Committee on 
Privileges and Elections, which then reported 7 to 5 adversely to Senator 
Smoot. From December 13, 1906, to February 20, 1907, the case was 
before the Senate and the final vote rejected the resolution and permitted 
Senator Smoot to retain his seat in the Senate. 
During the long period he sat in the Senate, from 1903 to 1933, he served 
on some of the most important committees, and was finally Chairman of 
the Ways and Means Committee. Since 1933 he has devoted his time to 
his public ministry as an apostle and to problems of administration in the 
leading councils of the Church. In private life he has many business, 
financial, and mining interests. 
His wife died on November 6, 1928, at Washington, D. C., and on July 2, 
1930, at Salt Lake City, he married Alice, born October 29, 1876, at 
Westvale, Yorkshire, England, the daughter of James and Martha (Hurst) 
Taylor, but more recently the widow of Edwin Spencer Sheets. 


GEORGE MORRISON SMOOT8
(1864 - 1915)
George Morrison Smoot, son of Abraham Owen and Anna Kirstine 
(Morrison) Smoot, was born January 9, 1864, at Salt Lake City, Utah. On 
December 19, 1888, at Manti, Utah, he married Mary Ann, born April 1, 
1865, at Round Valley, Morgan County, Utah, the daughter of Niels and 
Bengta (Flygare) Larson. 


Children of George and Mary Ann (Larson) Smoot
1. Zella Smoot, born 1890, died 1904. 
2. Morrison Smoot, born and died 1891. 
3. Mary Erma Smoot, born Dec. 5, 1893, married Oct. 8, 1914, 
Golden Stewart, born Apr. 9, 1892, son of William and Lillie 
(Stewart) Horsley, Issues: George Smoot, born May 30, 1916; 
and Zella, born Apr. 27, 1920. 

180

4. Margaret Anne Smoot, born Dec. 31, 1895, married June 21, 1916, 
James Benjamin, born Mar. 3, 1891, son of James and Alice 
(Gunn) Castleton. Issue: Jay Smoot, born Aug. 1, 1917. 
George Morrison Smoot served as missionary to Scandinavia and a 
counselor to the Bishopric at Lakeview from 1901 to 1903, and as 
Bishop of Vineyard Ward from 1903 to 1906. He was president of the 
Smoot Investment Company and maintained other business and mining 
interest. His wife departed on December 15, 1914, at Provo City, while 
he died shortly afterwards on January 17, 1915. 


BRIGHAM ROLAND SMOOT8
Brigham Roland Smoot, son of Abraham Owen and Anna Kirstine 
(Morrison) Smoot, was born June 15, 1869, at Salt Lake City, Utah. On 
June 20, 1900, he married Margaret Annella Nesbit who was born March 
26, 1870. To this union two children were born--Roland Nesbit, born 
May 7, 1901, and Annella Kerstina, born Oct. 12, 1902. 


WILLIAM COCHRANE ADKINSON SMOOT8
(1853 - 1933)
William Cochrane Adkinson Smoot, son of William and Martha Ann 
(Sessions) Smoot, was born February 8, 1853, at Salt Lake City, and died 
there January 7, 1933. He married on March 28, 1878, Mary Ann Sarah, 
born July 7, 1858, at Provo, the daughter of Samuel Stephen and Lydia 
Elizabeth (Hooker) Jones. All of their children were born at Provo. 


Children of William and Mary (Jones) Smoot
1. Edna Smoot, born Jan. 7, 1879, married Jan. 10, 1900, Lewis 
Ephraim, born Jan. 15, 1875, son of Soren and Caroline (Morgensen) 
Iverson. Issues: Ruth; June; and Louis Smoot, born 
June 9, 1903. 
2. William Cochrane Smoot, born June 3, 1882, died May 14, 1925, 
married Jan. 4, 1908, Ella Parker. 
3. Rulon Stephen Smoot, born Nov. 28, 1883, married Apr. 18, 1909, 
Margaret Walker. 
4. Genevieve Smoot, born Aug. 30, 1886, married Aug. 28, 1908, W. R. 
Spettigue. 
5. Vermilla Smoot, born Oct. 30, 1889, married Apr. 12, 1910, Edward 
Robert Beck, born Jan. 6, 1888. Issues: Vermilla Smoot, born 
Mar. 1, 1911; Mary Isadora, born Dec. 19, 1913; Edward Smoot, 
born Sept. 5, 1915; Jack Campbell, born July 25, 1917; and 
Audrey Margaret, born June 7, 1919. 

181



ALBERT CARLOS SMOOT9
Albert Carlos Smoot, son of William Cochrane Adkinson and Martha 
Ann (Sessions) Smoot, was born December 10, 1865, at Salt Lake City. 
He married Mary Evalyn, born March 26, 1867, at East Mill Creek, Utah, 
the daughter of James Madison and Edith Evalina (Pierce) Fisher. Issues: 
Albert Fisher Smoot, born August 13, 1893, married Stella Cowan; 
Evelyn Fern Smoot, born February 5, 1898; and Blaine Fisher Smoot, 
born 1906, died 1930. 


PEREGRINE SMOOT9
(1873 - 1916)
Peregrine Smoot, son of William C. A. and Martha Ann (Sessions) 
Smoot, was born March 12, 1873, at Salt Lake City, and died there 
March 14, 1916. He married Sarah Ellen Worthen, born November 2, 
1876. Issues: Elva, born about 1898, and Perry, born October 15, 1905. 


JOHN WOODRUFF SMOOT9
(1860 - 1930)
John Woodruff Smoot, son of William C. A. and Margaret Phoebe 
(Freeman) Smoot, was born March 18, 1860, at Parowan, Utah; and died 
June 1, 1930, at Deseret, Utah. About 1882 he married Catherine Aurella 
King born June 13, 1864, at Fillmore, Utah, and died December 8, 1918, 
at Coyoto, same State. 


Children of John Woodruff and Catherine (King) Smoot
1. Alice Smoot, born 1883, died 1891. 
2. Milton Leroy Smoot, born Aug. 8, 1886, married Mar. 6, 1921, 
Amy Riddle Ricketts, born Dec. 25, 1883. Issue: Milton La Rell, 
born Sept. 30, 1923. 
3. Helen Margaret Smoot, born Jan. 3, 1888, married 1911, Clell 
Miller Riddle, born June 26, 1887. Issues: Clell Mace, born Dec. 
2, 1912; Garn Smoot, born Aug. 18, 1914; Bernice, born Dec. 10, 
1916; Madora, born June 5, 1919; Orin Keith, born Aug. 3, 1921; 
Margaret, born July 3, 1923; and Kenneth Aurell, born June 14, 
1929. 
4. Joseph Lester Smoot, born Jan. 2, 1891, married 1912, Edna Louise 
Haws. Issues: Lester Haws, born Apr. 8, 1912; R. L., born July 
8, 1915; William Wilson, born 1918; and Addie, born Sept. 4, 
1922. 
5. Ferrol Smoot, born Oct. 16, 1892, married 1910, Mary Astor Ross, 
born Sept. 19, 1893. Issues: Jay Ferrol, born Apr. 3, 1913; Iris, 
born July 7, 1918; La Rue; and Roy. 
6. Jessie Smoot, born and died 1895. 


182

7. Arnold Owen Smoot, born Feb. 19, 1896, married July 24, 1921, 
Lola Fullmer. 
8. La Rue Smoot, born July 24, 1901, married Dec. 23, 1922, Harold 
H. Golden. Issues: Ancil, born Nov. 24, 1923; Harold Max, 
born June 2, 1925; and Jinnie Ray, born Aug. 26, 1926. 


ABRAHAM OWEN SMOOT III9
Abraham Owen Smoot, son of Abraham Owen and Electa (Bullock) 
Smoot, was born September 9, 1879, at Provo, Utah. On August 17, 
1904, he married Phoebe Jemina, born November 9, 1881, at Fillmore, 
the daughter of Orson G. and Ann (Dewsnup) Campbell. 


Children of Abraham and Phoebe (Campbell) Smoot
1. Electa Smoot, born 1905, died 1912. 
2. Abraham Owen Smoot IV. born Oct. 12, 1906, married Reva, born 
Nov. 27, 1902, dau. of Ezra and Maud (Donald) Stevens. 
Issues: Colleen May Daniels, b. May 1, 1924; Abraham Owen 
V., b. Nov. 3, 1933. 
3. Anna Smoot, born Jan. 29, 1909. 
4. Fern Smoot, born Mar. 19, 1911. 
5. Vera Smoot, born Apr. 19, 1915. 


ISAAC ALBERT SMOOT9
Isaac Albert Smoot, son of Abraham Owen and Electa (Bullock) Smoot, 
was born November 3, 1880, at Provo, Utah. He has been active in 
Church, political, and business affairs, and is the authority on the 
genealogy of the Utah branch of the Smoot family. From 1902-1903 he 
was engaged in mining, later acted as district manager of the Mountain 
States Telephone Co. From 1912-1914 he was assessor of Utah County, 
and from 1914-1918 State land commissioner for Idaho. In 1916 he was 
elected Democratic Chairman of Fremont County, Idaho, and in 1928 
was elected to the Utah House of Representatives and again in 1932, 
when he was Speaker of the House. Since 1933 he has been postmaster 
of Salt Lake City. In his Church he has served as member of a Bishopric 
and on the Granite Stake High Council. In 1903-1906 he filled a mission 
to England. On March 31, 1909, he married Nettie Smart, born April 9, 
1886, at Franklin, Idaho, the daughter of Samuel R. and Charlotte 
(Smart) Parkinson. 


Children of Isaac Albert and Mettie (Parkinson) Smoot
1. Ruth Parkinson Smoot, born June 25, 1910, Preston, Utah. 
2. Albert Parkinson Smoot, born Dec. 6, 1914, Provo, Utah. 
3. Richard Parkinson Smoot, born Nov. 21, 1917, Boise, Ida. 
4. Stephen Parkinson Smoot, born June 13, 1928, Salt Lake City. 


183



WENDELL MCMEANS SMOOT9
Wendell McMeans Smoot, son of Orson Parley and Alexandrina (Snell) 
Smoot, was born February 28, 1897, at Spanish Forks, Utah. He married 
Rebecca, born August 27, 1897, daughter of Stanley and Mary (Jones) 
Clawson. Issues: Rebecca, born November 20, 1919; Wendell McMeans, 
born January 15, 1921; and Stanley Clawson, born November 11, 1925. 


DOUGLAS PARLEY SMOOT9
Douglas Parley Smoot, son of Orson Parley and Ellen (Conder) Smoot, 
was born January 1, 1909, at Provo, Utah. His wife is Jennie Hollam, 
born March 21, 1910, at Spanish Ford, Utah. Issues: Clio Beth, born 
August 23, 1928; Norma Helen, born July 21, 1930; and Leon Douglas, 
born July 26, 1934. 


HAROLD REED SMOOT9
Harold Reed Smoot, son of Reed and Alpha May (Eldredge) Smoot, was 
born March 16, 1887, at Provo, Utah, and was married to Alice Nibley 
on September 21, 1910. She was born April 3, 1890, at Logan, Utah, the 
daughter of President Charles Wilson Nibley and Rebecca Ann Neibaur, 
his wife. Three children were born--Alice, born Aug. 16, 1911; Charles 
Reed, born May 16, 1915; and Harold Nibley. 


HARLOW ELDREDGE SMOOT9
Harlow Eldredge Smoot, son of Reed and Alpha May (Eldredge) Smoot, 
was born May 2, 1891, at Salt Lake City, Utah. On June 26, 1912, he 
married Anita Parkinson, born January 11, 1891, at Franklin, Idaho, the 
daughter of Samuel Chandler and Mary Anne (Hobbs) Parkinson. 


Children of Harlow and Ansta (Parkinson) Smoot
1. Seth Eldredge Smoot, born May 9, 1913, married Aug. 15, 1933, 
Lillian Gladys, born May 21, 1912, dau. of Philip Harrison and 
Mary Mehitable (Wilson) Hurst. Issues: Harlow Eldredge, 
born July 4, 1935. 
2. Anita Smoot, born Sept. 27, 1916. 
3. Reed Smoot, born June 8, 1919. 
4. Samuel Parkinson Smoot, born Dec. 31, 1920. 


184


During the World War he enlisted as a private and after eighteen months 
of service he was discharged with the rank of captain. At present (1936) 
he is with the engineering department of the Utah Power and Light 
Company. 


ERNEST WINDER SMOOT9
Ernest Winder Smoot, son of Reed and Alpha May (Eldredge) Smoot, 
was born January 19, 1902, at Provo City, Utah. His wife was Martha 
Gehring, born April 13, 1902, who died after an illness of several years 
on September 21, 1934, at Washington, D. C. Three children were born--
Allie May on January 11, 1924; Ernest; and Martha Ann. 

185



MISCELLANEOUS


MARYLAND
Henry Smoot was born about 1795. He served as private in the 
detachment of Major King, D. C. Militia, and later as a corporal in the 
company of Captain Richard Johns. It is believed that he was the Henry 
Smoot who died intestate in Charles County, when his widow, Catherine 
Smoot, was named administratrix. The inventory of his estate was taken 
on February 16, 1816. At the final account, showing no distribution, in 
1820 his widow was Catherine Brawner. 
Catherine Smoot in 1817 was the widow of Major Samuel McPherson 
and the mother of Richard and Robert H. McPherson. 
Robert Smoot and wife, of St. Mary's County, with William Guyther 
were executors of the estate of Richard Swan Edwards in 1773. Robert 
Smoot signed the petition of Patrick Graham, of Port Tobacco Parish, in 
1775. 
Eli Smoot and Horatio Smoot, both of Charles County, witnessed the will 
of Benjamin Wilder in 1790. 
James Smoot died intestate in Charles County, when letters of 
administration were issued to his widow, Chloe Smoot, on May 17, 1802. 
Samuel Milstead and John Terrell offered bond. At the sale of the 
personal estate, the principal purchasers were Chloe Smoot, Barton 
Smoot, Samuel Smoot, Thomas Milstead, and William Smoot who 
bought the wearing apparel. The final account, rendered by Chloe Smoot 
on October 21, 1807, showed no distribution. 
Matthew Smoot, of Charles County, a drafted militiaman, was discharged 
from the Revolutionary Army on December 10, 1781. In 1798 Matthew 
Smoot, of Charles County, was a surety for Anne Dodson, the 
administrator of William Dodson. 
Mary Smoot, of Charles County, on June 5, 1819, conveyed 
"Retirement", lying in St. Mary's County to Ignatius Mattingly. 
Joseph Smoot, born between 1780-1790, was the head of a family in 
Durham Parish, of Charles County, in 1830, with a woman between the 
age of 50 and 60 and another between 20 and 30, three men between 30 
and 40, one man between 20 and 30, and one man between 15 and 20, 
and seventeen slaves. Joseph Smoot and Mary Anne his wife conveyed 
"Milford", lying in Durham Parish on the Potomac River and Marlow 
Creek, to Daniel Kennedy. 
Thomas Smoot, born about 1814 in Maryland, was the head of a family 
in Allen's Fresh District, of Charles County, in 1850. In his 


186

household were also Mary E. Smoot, born 1829, and Francis Smoot, born 
1844. 
Mary S. Smoot, born 1818 in Maryland, was the head of a family in 
Allen's Fresh District, of Charles County, in 1850. With her were Martha 
E. Brennon, born 1839. 


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
George Arthur Smoot served as a private in Captain John J. Stull's 
Company of Riflemen, First D. C. Regiment, commanded by Colonel 
Magruder and Lieutenant Thompson. He enlisted June 19, 1814, and was 
in service as late as October 8, of the same year. On August 22, 1817, he 
secured license at Alexandria to marry Elizabeth Blane. On March 1, 
1831, he conveyed land to Walter Smoot at which time his wife 
Elizabeth waived her dower. On April 17, 1824, he transferred lot No. 6 
on the east side of 11 Street Northwest to David Appler. 
On July 13, 1833 he secured license to marry Anne Mitchell, widow. In 
November 1835, he deeded personal property to Walter Smoot in trust 
for the use of his wife Anne Smoot. No further record of him exists 
among the public records. 
The will of his widow Anne Smoot was dated March 4, 1854, and proved 
in the District of Columbia on July 22, 1854, by P. McKenna, Martha 
McKenna, and Oliver McConnell. She bequeathed to her son John 
William Smoot land opposite Good Hope which her late husband 
"George Arthur Smoot" purchased from George Naylor. To her daughter, 
Anne Virginia Smoot, she devised the house and lot on Pennsylvania 
Avenue in square 790 and the house and lot on M Street between 10 and 
11 Streets East in square 777. Various articles of personal property were 
divided between her two Smoot children. Her son Joseph T. Mitchell was 
willed $100, while the following were devised $1.00 each--Joseph T. 
Mitchell, Frances Eugene Mitchell, James Thomas Broscuo, and Martha 
Anne Anderson. She named her brother Thomas Jenkins as the executor. 
Walter Smoot on October 14, 1820 purchased from Ulysses Ward, of 
Georgetown, in "Beatty and Hawkins' Addition" at the northeast corner 
of Market and Third Streets a two-storied brick dwelling. The 
conveyance was witnessed by John Threlkeld and Daniel Bussard, with 
Susan Verlinda Ward relinquishing her dower. On May 31, 1823, Walter 
Smoot and Ulysses Ward conveyed the lot and dwelling, as described 
above, to Walter S. Ringgold. Susan Verlinda Ward released her thirds, 
but no wife of Walter Smoot. In 1827 he purchased from John J. Stull, 
trustee for Lloyd Pumphrey lot No. 23 on the northside 

187

of Prospect Street at its intersection with West Lane, and in 1828 he 
received from George A. Smoot in lieu of a debt of $1,200 a lot on the 
east side of 11 Street in the Federal City. 
On May 8, 1835, Walter Smoot, Joel Crittenden, and Raphael Semmes 
were commissioned to divide the estate of Joseph N. Fearson and Mary 
Anne his wife, the latter being the daughter and co-heir of John 
McPherson, deceased. On November 30, 1835, he bought from John 
Marbury, trustee, two lots in Georgetown on the north side of Prospect 
Street. 
Mary Smoot died in Georgetown during 1857. Her will dated March 24, 
1857, was proved in the District of Columbia on May 26, 1857, by Mary 
Jane Pairo, Anne H. Waters, and Mildred M. Bronaugh. She willed her 
grandsons William and Charles the vacant lot on the west side of her 
dwelling house on the north side of Prospect Street in Georgetown. To 
her granddaughter Mary Anna Smoot she devised the mansion house and 
lot where she was living at the intersection of Prospect and Market 
Streets, but her daughter-in-law Mary B. Smoot was to enjoy the use of it 
during life. She named her daughter-in-law the guardian of the 
grandchildren, and Richard Plummer Jackson, the executor of the estate. 
Mary B. Smoot, the daughter-in-law, was born 1818 in Virginia, and 
according to the 1860 census was possessed of realty appraised at $5,000 
and personalty at $3,000. Her son, Charles C. Smoot, died unmarried, 
willing his entire estate to his mother. The will was admitted to probate 
on January 5, 1864. 
John H. Smoot served as private in Captain Benjamin Burch's Company 
of 2nd Regiment of D. C. Artillery during the War of 1812, being 
stationed most of the time in the neighborhood of Piscataway, Maryland. 
After the war he was employed as master carpenter at the Washington 
Navy Yard. On March 13, 1827, he as a widower married Elizabeth 
Speiden, among those present at the ceremony were Mrs. Margaret 
Speiden and Mrs. Maranda Clubb. He died January 29, 1849, and was 
interred in Congressional Cemetery, Washington. On March 11, 1871, 
his widow Elizabeth Smoot applied for a pension under the act to provide 
for a service pension for the widows of veterans of War of 1812. Records 
show that she was living as late as 1878. 


WESTMORELAND COUNTY, VIRGINIA
William Smoot, widower, married Charlotte Kirkham, widow, according 
to marriage bond of Northumberland County, on May 30, 1829. In 1850 
Charlotte Smoot, aged 66, was the head of a household in Westmoreland 
County. 


188

Jane Smoot, aged 61, born in Virginia, was living in 1850 at the home of 
Edward W. Owens. 
Elizabeth Smoot married Beckwith Butler, according to bond on June 29, 
1829, with Sam Davis as surety. 


CULPEPER COUNTY, VIRGINIA
Thomas M. Smoot, born 1775-1794, was the head of a family in 
Culpeper County at the 1810 and 1820 censuses. According to the latter, 
he had in his household a female born 1775-1794, a male born prior to 
1775, and 2 boys and 2 girls, all born between 1810-1820. He owned 17 
slaves. On August 23, 1820, he purchased land at Elkton, Culpeper 
County, formerly belonging to Beverley Carter for $4,694.21, sold by a 
decree of the chancery court held at Fredericksburg. On August 18, 1821, 
he sold the portion on which he was then living to James S. Emmons, of 
Culpeper County, and on December 3, 1823, another portion to Enoch 
Jameson. On January 27, 1826, he purchased from John S. Thornton 40 
acres of land at $14 per acre, adjoining the land of William C. Carter. 
Elizabeth Smoot, of Culpeper County, in 1798 purchased from Harman 
Wisecarver and Bridget his wife for œ400 land consisting of 150 acres on 
the south side of Thornton River in Mozingo's old line. 
Benjamin Smoot, born before 1765, was the head of a family in Culpeper 
County in 1810, with a female born prior to 1765, and the following 
children--2 girls born 1765-1784; 1 boy born 1784-1794; 3 girls and 1 
boy born 1800-1810. 
Anne B. Smoot, widow, was born in Virginia about the year 1789, but 
research has failed to disclose the name of her husband. She was 
probably married after 1810 and being widowed before 1820, the census 
records have been of very little service in drawing any possible 
conclusions. She first appears as the head of a family in 1820, with two 
boys less than ten years of age, a girl between the ages of 16 and 26, and 
13 slaves. In February 1833, she purchased from Reuben Thornton and 
Lydia his wife, all parties being of Culpeper County, for $150 land on the 
road leading from Culpeper Court House to Raccon Ford, adjoining the 
lands of John Collins, Reuben Rosson, and Benjamin Truman. This tract 
in 1836 she deeded to her son John. 


Children of Anne B. Smoot
1. James W. Smoot married Frances Cowhert. q.v. 
2. John H. Smoot married Susan A. Henrick. q.v. 

189


The will of Anne B. Smoot was dated July 9, 1857, and probated 
November 5, 1860, in Culpeper County, Virginia, by George E. 
Marshall, Abraham Curtis, and Nancy L. Vaughan. She directed that the 
proceeds of her estate be divided between the five children of her son, 
John H. Smoot, and Amanda Anne Smoot, daughter of her son, James W. 
Smoot, of Louisa County, Virginia. 
Her personal estate was appraised at $1,557.50. The final distribution 
was made February 1, 1870, to the five children (unnamed) of John H. 
Smoot and to Amanda "F". Smoot. 
James W. Smoot, son of Anne, was born about 1812 perhaps in Culpeper 
County. On September 24, 1835, he secured license in Louisa County to 
marry Frances, daughter of Reuben Cowherd. His bondsmen were John 
Hunter, J. F. Cowherd, and Charles S. Jones. 
In 1838 he and John Smoot purchased from Alexander H. Hansborough 
and Elizabeth his wife, all property in the town of Fairfax (now called 
Culpeper) then used by John F. Almond as a tavern, once owned by 
Jeremiah Strother, deceased. Shortly after the deed of conveyance, they 
sold to Thomas P. Flint, at which time Frances, wife of James W. Smoot, 
joined in the deed. 
Amanda Smoot, daughter of James, was made an heir in the will of her 
paternal grandmother in 1857. At the census of 1860 Amanda Smoot was 
living in Louisa County, with Jonathan Cowherd, giving her age as 21 
years and having been born in Goochland County. She possessed 
personal property appraised at $5,780. 
John H. Smoot, son of Anne, was born 1814 in Culpeper County. On 
September 3, 1839, in Fauquier County, Virginia, he obtained license to 
marry Susan A. Henrick, who was born 1818 in Nelson County. 


Children of John and Susan (Henrick) Smoot
1. Mary Anne Smoot, born 1844, Fauq. Co. 
2. John H. Smoot, born 1846, Culp. Co. 
3. William A. Smoot, born 1848, Culp. Co. 
4. Amanda Smoot, born 1855, Culp. Co. 
5. Ada Smoot, born 1857, Culp. Co. 
The above-named children of John H. Smoot were listed in the 1860 
census, and are undoubtedly the ones who shared in the will of their 
paternal grandmother in 1870. John H. Smoot was a carpenter, with 
realty appraised at $200, and with him was also his mother whose real 
estate was assessed at $1,500 and personal estate at $3,150. 

190




RAPPAHANNOCK COUNTY, VIRGINIA
Loften Smoot enlisted August 11, 1814, as private in Captain Charles 
Shackelford's Company of Riflemen from Culpeper County, 34th 
Virginia Regiment. The muster dated "Frederickburg, December 17, 
1814", records him as a deserter. Thomas Smoot, enlisting in the same 
outfit and at the same time, was also a deserter. 
In 1835 Loften Smoot, resident of Culpeper, conveyed to Richard Payne 
Jr. and others household furniture, blacksmith's tools, etc. . . . in order to 
meet an indebtedness of $73.84. In 1840 he was the head of a family in 
Rappahannock County, being born between 1780-1790, and had a 
number of children in his household. He was not the head of a family 
there in 1850. 


PRINCE WILLIAM COUNTY, VIRGINIA
William H. Smoot, cooper, born 1825 in Virginia, and Catherine Smoot, 
born 1792, same State, were living in the household of Charles C. 
Sullivan in 1850. On April 30, 1855, William H. Smoot conveyed to 
Lawrence Cole for $25 all his interest in the estate of his deceased 
mother, Catherine Smoot. 
Samuel Smoot and Elizabeth his wife conveyed to Albert M. Arrington 
land in Occoquan on Hooe's Creek that had been conveyed in 1816 by 
Samuel Williams and Elizabeth his wife. 


FAUQUIER COUNTY, VIRGINIA
Thomas H. Smoot, blacksmith, born 1792 in Virginia, was the head of a 
family in Ashby's District in 1850. The following completed his 
household--wife, Elizabeth, born 1800 in Virginia; Mary A., born 1833; 
Lucinda, born 1834; Thomas A., 1836; Louisa, 1837; Benjamin F., 1839; 
Sara E., 1841; and Andrew, 1842. 
James S. Smoot, born 1823, his wife Carolina V., born 1829, and 
daughter Mary S., born 1849--all native Virginians--were living in the 
home of William McCormick, of Ashby's District, in 1850. 
John Smoot married Frances, daughter of Francis Jett. As the 
administrator of his father-in-law's estate he was sued by Nathaniel 
Kykendall to recover a debt of $48.95, with interest from November 1, 
1834. In 1836 it was stated that John Smoot had moved from Fauquier 
County and "out of the Commonwealth to parts unknown". 


HENRICO COUNTY, VIRGINIA
John Smoot, born 1807, in Virginia, obtained license on September 25, 
1827, to marry Sarah, born 1809, daughter of John Blackburn. The 
following children are proved--John W., born 1832; Robert J., born 

191

1839, married July 3, 1863, Marcella, born 1841, daughter of William 
and Sarah Gordon; Sarah Frances, born 1840, married January 11, 1866, 
Daniel Cooley, born 1841, at Bingham, Me., son of Edward and Martha 
Cooley; Mary, born 1841; Nancy G., born 1844; Paulina, born 1846. 


HAMPSHIRE COUNTY, VIRGINIA
John Smoot, born 1808 in Virginia with his wife Sarah, born 1813, same 
State, was the head of a family in 1850. The following children were at 
home--Caroline, born 1830; Evaline, born 1832; Demianne, born 1834; 
Sarah, born 1836; Catherine, born 1838; Elizabeth, born 1840; and 
Chloe, born 1842. 
William G. Smoot, born 1812 in Virginia with his wife Iffee, born 1815, 
same State, was the head of a family in 1850. The following children 
were at home--Jonathan, born 1837; Mary, born 1839; Sarah, born 1841; 
Hannah, born 1843; Margaret, born 1845; Tabitha, born 1847; and 
Rebecca, born 1850. 


BERKELEY COUNTY, VIRGINIA
Edward Smote negotiated his will 1797, naming his wife Jane and 
daughter Rachel, with Adopheus Euster and his wife as executors. 


WYOMING COUNTY, VIRGINIA
Gabriel Smoot, born 1819, in Virginia, was living at Oceano in 1860. His 
household consisted in that year of his wife Ellen, born 1827, and the 
following children--Wyley H., born 1846; Creed F., born 1847; Mary, 
born 1849; Sarah, born 1850; Galloway, born 1851; Jasper, born 1853; 
Martha, born 1857; and Arlety, born 1859. 
He enlisted in Company H. 22d Virginia Volunteer Regiment, C. S. A., 
and on March 14, 1862, was taken prisoner by Capt. West Sovelry, U. S. 
A. His prison description was: Complexion fair, hair sandy, height 5 ft. 8 
in., eyes blue, age 44, whiskers turning grey. 


DAVIE COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA
Jacob Smoot, born 1812 in North Carolina, and Matilda, born 1816 same 
State, were living near Calohala and County Line in 1860 with the 
following children--William A., born 1839; John, born 1840; Sarah E., 
born 1841; Mary, born 1843; David Willson, born 1845; and Thomas L., 
born 1849. 

192


FLEMINGTON COUNTY, KENTUCKY
Stephen Smoot, born 1787 in Virginia, married Matilda Mitchell in 
Mason County by license on December 29, 1818. The 1850 census 
showed him a wool carder of Flemington County, with the following in 
his household--Sarah Smoot, born 1808 and Rebecca Smoot, born 1837. 
George Smoot, born 1795 in Kentucky, secured license to marry Sarah 
Jones on December 23, 1819. In 1825 he was taxed for 77 acres of land. 
In 1850 he was listed as a farmer with his wife, and the following 
composing his immediate family--Elizabeth Smoot, born 1833; Mary 
Smoot, born 1835; and Maranda Smoot, born 1839. 
John Smoot, born 1796 in Kentucky, was seized of 60 acres of land in 
1825. On March 20, 1823, he secured license to marry Ariel Roe. The 
1850 census listed him as a farmer, with realty assessed at $1,000. In his 
household besides his wife were Sinclair, born 1828; Salem Smoot, born 
1831 (married 1855 Fidelia Smoot); Elbert D. Smoot, born 1833; 
Christopher Smoot, born 1834; John M. Smoot, born 1839; Almira M. 
Smoot, born 1842; and Louisa R. Smoot, born 1845. 
Reuben Smoot, born 1800 in Kentucky, was listed as a farmer in 1850, 
with realty assessed at $200. In his household was his wife Sarah, born 
1810 in Kentucky, and the following children--Trinvilla, born 1831; 
Leander, born 1832; Fedelia, born 1836; Sinclair, born 1839; William H., 
born 1840; Eliza S., born 1843; Nancy B., born 1845; James S. R., born 
1848; and John W. H., born 1850. 
Marshall Smoot, born 1822 in Kentucky, was listed as a resident in 1850, 
with his wife, Martha Anne, born 1832, in Kentucky, and a son Francis 
M., born 1850. 
Woodville D. Smoot, born 1827 in Kentucky, was listed as a wool carder 
in 1850, with his wife Amanda, born 1825 in Kentucky, and a daughter, 
Sarah Anne, born 1848. 


GRAYSON COUNTY, KENTUCKY
Thomas Smoot, born 1825 in Kentucky, was the head of a family in 
1850, with his wife, Patsy, born 1824 in Tennessee. They had the 
following children--James, born 1845; William, born 1847; and 
Elizabeth, born 1849. 


MAURY COUNTY, TENNESSEE
Samuel Smoot, on December 18, 1813, enlisted as private in Captain 
Nathan Davis' Company, West Tennessee Militia. His discharge papers 
showed him absent one month without leave, for which time pay was 
deducted, and the allowance for 10 days traveling to his home, with 

193

rations at thirteen cents per day. On May 17, 1814, he granted power of 
attorney to his "trusted friend Thomas J. Reed, of Davidson County, 
Tennessee" to collect all back pay. His original discharge, now on file in 
the War Department, was submitted and reads as follows: 
Fort Deposit, Apr. 18, 1814. 
I do certify that Samuel Smoot of a consolidated company under my 
command has served a tour of three months faithfully under the 
Command of Major General Andrew Jackson and is hereby discharged 
with the well wishes of his General. 
(signed) Nathan Davis Capt. 


WARREN COUNTY, TENNESSEE
William Smoot, born 1813 in Kentucky, was the head of a family in 
1850, with his wife Matilda, born 1822. The following children 
composed his household--Mary, born 1843; Thomas, born 1845; 
William, born 1846; and Sophia, born 1848. 


SUMTER COUNTY, GEORGIA
William H. Smoot was born 1821--one record says North Carolina 
another South Carolina. In 1880 he stated that his father was a native of 
North Carolina and his mother of Georgia. His wife was Susan ----, 
born 1827 in Georgia as well as her father and mother. The following 
children, all born in Georgia, have been proved--Richard G., born 1849; 
married Mary, born 1852, and had a son Auburt, born 1878; Mary, born 
1851; Lovick P., born 1855; Mollie, born 1856; Charles X., born 1858; 
Edgar, born 1861; Effie L., born 1864; and Katie, born 1865. 


RUSSELL COUNTY, ALABAMA
George Smoot, born about 1807 in North Carolina, was living with his 
family in Talbot County, Georgia, at the 1840 census. In 1850 he was the 
head of a family in Russell County, Alabama, with the following 
members--Georgia, born 1836 in Georgia; Julia, born 1842 in Georgia; 
Nancy, born 1844 in Georgia; Marcellus, born 1846 in Alabama; and 
James C., born 1849 in Alabama. At the 1870 census George Smoot was 
a resident of Opelika, Lee County, the latter in the meantime having been 
organized from Russell County. In his home in that year was C. S. 
Smoot, born 1805 in Georgia, and his youngest son James C. 


194



MARENGO COUNTY, ALABAMA
Sophia W. Smoot, born about 1786 in Maryland, was the head of a 
family in 1850. In her household were Mary A. C. Smoot, born 1810 in 
North Carolina, Cordelia Smoot, born 1814 in North Carolina, Rebecca 
A., born 1824 in Alabama, and John Smoot, born 1844, in Alabama. 
George W. Smoot, born 1817 in South Carolina, resided on the adjoining 
farm to that of Sophia Smoot, and had in his home Elizabeth J. Smoot, 
born 1829 in Alabama, and Mary S. Smoot, born 1849 in Alabama. 


MUSKINGUM COUNTY, OHIO
Barton Smoot was born about 1834 in Muskingum County, Ohio--one 
daughter stated March 10, 1833, another March 29, 1835. He was 
probably the son of Nathan Smoot who, between the ages of 30 and 40, 
was the head of a family in Adams Township during 1830, but who was 
not a resident of that county at the 1840 census. His household at the 
1830 census consisted of a male born between 1810-1815, a female born 
between 1800-1810, and four children born between 1820-1830. 
Circumstances would seem to indicate that he was the Nathan Smoot 
who on October 8, 1822, secured license in Harrison County, Indiana, to 
marry Elizabeth Helm. 
The following brothers and sisters of Barton Smoot were recalled by a 
descendant--Alonzo; Anne who married ---- Castle; Samelda who 
married ---- McGee; Harvey; Thomas; and John. 
Barton Smoot married first Elizabeth Barton, according to tradition, in 
the State of Illinois, and became the parents of eight children, but only 
five matured--Saralda; James, John, Lyman, and Ida. On February 22, 
1881, at Monticello, Illinois, he married secondly Sarah Elizabeth Morse, 
to whom were born--Daniel, Otis, Mina, Earl, and Laura. The latter 
married Leslie Reese, of Waterloo, Iowa, and became the parents of 
Elwood Reese. Barton Smoot died at Mallard, Iowa, on November 7, 
1921. 


LEWIS COUNTY, MISSOURI
G. Smoot, born 1836 in Missouri, and his wife Louisa, born 1836 in 
Virginia, were living near Monticello in 1870, with the following 
children--Josiah M., born 1861; John S., born 1862; Emma J., born 1864; 
Susan E., born 1866; Mary F., born 1866; and Harriet A., born 1868. 


195

John Smoot, born 1842 in Missouri, and his wife Somerville, born 1844 
in Missouri, had the following children at home in 1870--Robert, born 
1864; Sebersa and James F. (twins), born 1870. 


MARION COUNTY, MISSOURI
Thomas Smoot, born 1807 in Virginia, was living in Fabins Township in 
1850, with the following as members of his household--Sarah A., born 
1822 in Virginia; Daniel, born 1831 in Virginia; Matilda, born 1832 in 
Virginia; Thomas P., born 1834 in Virginia; Louisa C., born 1845 in 
Missouri; Philip G., born 1846 in Missouri; Polk, born 1848 in Missouri; 
and Cass, born 1850 in Missouri. 

196



MILITARY AND NAVAL SERVICES
It was the intention of the compiler to include only services that had not 
been established in the text of this book. 


REVOLUTIONARY WAR




Soldier
Rank
Company

Organization 



John Smoot
Pvt
Capt. John Hoskins Stone

Maryland Line 
John Smoot
Pvt
Capt. Alexander McPherson

Chas. Co. Militia 
William B. 
Smoot
Corpl
Capt. John Parnham

Chas. Co. Militia 


WAR OF 1812




Soldier
Rank


Regiment
County in which organized 




Barton Smoot
Pvt


56th Va. Inf.
Loudoun 


Dixon Smoot
Pvt


2nd Ohio Inf.
---- 


George W. Smoot
Corpl


7th Va. Inf.
Norfolk 


Hiram Smoot
Pvt


5th N. C. Inf.
Wilkes 


John Smoot
Pvt


S. C. Militia
---- 


John Smoot
Pvt


2nd D. C. Inf.
---- 


John B. Smoot
Pvt


34th Va. Inf.
Culpeper 


John B. Smoot
Pvt


4th Va. Inf.
Pittsylvania 


John B. Smoot
Pvt


4th Va. Inf.
Ohio 


Sandy Smoot
Sergt


11th Md. Regt.
Dorchester 


Thomas N. 
Smoot
Sergt


Miss. Militia
Natchez 


William Smoot
Pvt


Ohio Militia
---- 


William Smoot
Pvt


1st Va. Regt.
Amelia 


Wyatt Smoot
Pvt


6th Va. Inf.
Essex 

INDLAN CAMPAIGNS



Soldier
War
Organization 


Edward Smoot
Creek
Ala. Mounted Volunteers 
Gabriel S. Smoot
Cherokee
3rd N. C. Regt. 
William F. Smoot
Seminole
Tenn. Mounted Militia 

197



MEXICAN WAR, 1846-1848



Soldier
Rank
Organization 


Benjamin F. Smoot
Pvt
McGown's 1st Texas Mounted Rifles 
Edward M. Smoot
Sergt
Co. K, 1st La. Inf. 
Edmond M. Smoot
Pvt
Desha's Co., Ala. Volunteers 
John B. Smoot
Pvt
Co. I, 1st Miss. Inf. 
Joseph C. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, Ark Mounted Inf. 
William Smoot
Pvt
3rd U. S. Inf. 


CIVIL WAR--NORTHERN ARMY



Soldier
Rank
Organization 


Alonzo S. Smoot
Pvt
Co. E, 149th Ill. Inf. 
Benjamin F. Smoot
Pvt
Co. M, 1st Ind. Heavy Art. 
Benjamin F. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 116th Ill. Inf. 
Charles L. Smoot
Pvt
Co. E, 8th Iowa Inf. 
Charles Smoot
Pvt
Hamilton's Body Guard, Tex. Cav. 
Charles Smoot
Pvt
Co. E, 1st Tex. Cav. 
David Smoot
Pvt
Bat. C, 1st Ill. Art. 
David Smoot
Pvt
Co. H, 8th Ill. Inf. 
George W. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 1st Minn. Inf. 
Gideon Smoot
Sergt
Co. I, 10th Tenn. Cav. 
Gideon Smoot
1st Lieut
Co. B, 3rd N. C. Mounted Inf. 
Henry A. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 144th Ill. Inf. 
Hiram H. Smoot
Pvt
Balto., Md. Light Art. 
James H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 63rd Ind. Inf. 
James Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 43rd Ill. Inf. 
James J. Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 135th Ill. Inf. 
James K. P. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 135th Ill. Inf. 
James P. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 26th Ky. Inf. 
James W. Smoot
Pvt
1st Md. Inf. 
John E. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 9th Kans. Inf. 
John Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 107th Ill. Inf. 
John R. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 2nd Ark. Cav. 
John W. Smoot
Pvt
4th Bn D. C. Inf. 
Lorenzo T. Smoot
Pvt
Co. H, 53rd Ky. Inf. 
Moses A. Smoot
Musician
Co. I, 116th Ill. Inf. 
Nathan Smoot Jr.
Pvt
Co. I, 125th Ill. Inf. 
Robert Smoot
Pvt
1st Md. Inf. 
Samuel Smoot
Pvt
Co. I, 35th Ill. Inf. 

198


Thomas C. Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 150th Ill. Inf. 
Walker W. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 10th Ky. Cav. 
Warren T. Smoot
Pvt
Sullivan's Co. of Inf. 
Warren T. Smoot
Pvt
Co. L. 2nd Mo. Cav. 
William Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 154th Ill. Inf. 
William Smoot
Pvt
Co. I, 27th Ky. Inf. 
William Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 11th Mo. Cav. 
William L. Smoot
Pvt
25th Ohio Inf. 
William V. Smoot
Trumpeter
Co. H, 10th Tenn. Cav. 
William H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. I, 53rd Ky. Inf. 
William G. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, D. C. Inf. 
Willson Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 154th Ill. Inf. 
Woodville Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 7th Ky. Cav. 


UNITED STATES NAVY



Sailor or officer
Place of 
enlistment
Vess
el
Date of 
enlistment
Date of 
discharge 




James A. Smott
Baltimore
Euta
w
June 20, 
1863
Court 
martialed 
Joseph Smoot
Baltimore
Roan
oke
Sept. 10, 
1864
June 20, 1865 
Philip Smoot
Philadelphia
Mohi
can
Oct. 18, 1862
May 13, 1865 
George W. Smoot, mate
----
----
July 1, 1863
Feb. 7, 1865 
John H. Smoot, Asst. 
Paymaster
----
----
Aug. 20, 
1864
Sept. 19, 
1865 
William G. Smoot, 
Asst. Engineer
----
----
June 4, 1862
Feb. 15, 1866 


MISCELLANEOUS NAVAL NOTES
David Smoot and Charles H. Posey were captured on March 7, 1863, by 
J. B. Fairchild, Acting Master's Mate. U. S. S. Eureka, on the Virginia 
shore of the Potomac River opposite the Wicomico River in Maryland in 
the attempt to run the blockade and to deliver three barrels of whiskey to 
the Confederate forces. 
The schooner G. H. Smoot, of Edenton, North Carolina, property of 
"rebel citizens of North Carolina", being of 36 tons was captured on May 
18, 1862, by Lieut. Edmond R. Colhoun, U. S. N., in Potecasi Creek 
about one-quarter mile above the mouth of the Meherrin River 



199

in the sounds of North Carolina, having been engaged in the 
transportation of troops and supplies for "the enemies of the U. S. 
Government". 
Captain James Allen, U. S. S. Fort Jackson, at Hampton Roads, on 
September 16, 1863, despatched the following to Washington--"I 
observed the conduct of a young officer, Acting Master's Mate, George 
W. Smoot, who behaved particularly well in ascertaining the locality and 
extent of the fire and in extinguishing it. I would therefore recommend 
that he be promoted to acting ensign". 
December 9, 1864, George W. Smoot, Acting Master's Mate, U. S. N., at 
Gosport Navy Yard, aboard the U. S. S. Fort Jackson requested three 
days' leave of absence on account of sickness in his family. 


CONFEDERATE STATES ARMY
The following data were obtained from the Office of the Adjutant 
General at Washington; it is understood, however, that more complete 
data may be obtained at Richmond. 



Soldier
Rank
Organization 


A. J. Smoot
Pvt
Co. H, 53rd Ga. Inf. 
A. K. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 9th Va. Cav. 
Albert H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 5th Ga. Inf. 
Alexander Smoot
Pvt
Co. F. 42nd N. C. Inf. 
Alfred A. Smoot
Pvt
Cos. G and L, 1st Ala. Inf. 
Alfred E. Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 3rd Ala. Inf. 
Augustus K. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 47th Va. Inf. 
Ausman K. Smoot
Pvt
Co. E, 37th Tenn. Inf. 
B. B. Smoot
Pvt
Capt. Thornton's Co., Va. Art. 
B. F. Smoot
Pvt
Co. F, Crescent Regt. La. Inf. 
B. F. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 1st S. C. Inf. 
B. P. Smoot
Pvt
Capt. Thornton's Co., Va. Art. 
B. S. Smoot
Pvt
Co. E, 1st Ga. Cav. 
B. S. Smoot
Pvt
Co. I, 2nd Ga. Cav. 
Benjamin Smoot
Pvt
Co. F & M, 8th S. C. Inf. 
Benjamin F. Smoot
Pvt
Co. I, 2nd Ga. Cav. 
Benjamin W. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 19th Bn. Va. Art. 
Benjamin W. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 51st Va. Inf. 
Burton B. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 47th Va. Inf. 
C. Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 3rd Ga. Reserves 
C. C. Smoot
2nd Lieut
Selden's Battery, Ala. Light Art. 
Caleb Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 13th Ark. Inf. 
Charles W. Smoot
Pvt
Co. F, 7th Va. Cav. 

200


Creed F. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 22nd Va. Inf. 
D. C. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 6th Ga. Inf. (State Guards) 
Daniel J. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 45th Va. Inf. 
Dewitt C. 
Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 1st Bn. Ga. Res. Cav. 
Frank Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 12th Ga. Cav. 
Frank L. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 2nd Bn. Ga. Sharp Shooters 
G. H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 38th Bn. Va. Light Art. 
G. T. Smoot
Pvt
Co. E, 12th Ky. Cav. 
George Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 2nd Ky. Cav. 
George W. 
Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 4th Mo. Cav. 
George W. 
Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 1st N. E. Mo. Cav. 
George W. 
Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 3rd Va. Reserves 
George W. 
Smoot
Pvt
Co. F, 10th Va. Inf. 
Gustavus Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 12th Va. Inf. 
H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. H, 30th Va. Inf. 
H. C. Smoot
Pvt
Co. --, 13th Ark. Cav. 
H. P. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 10th Ala. Inf. 
Henry Smoot
Pvt
Co. I, 23rd Va. Cav. 
Henry Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 97th Va. Militia 
J. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 8th Bn. Va. Reserves 
J. A. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, S. C. Light Art. 
J. G. Smoot
Pvt
Co. F, Mosby's Regt., Va. Cav. 
J. H. Smoot
1st Lieut & Capt
4th Ala. Reserves 
J. H. Smoot
Pvt
La. Militia 
J. K. Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 1st Va. Cav. 
J. L. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 55th Ala. Vols. 
J. L. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 2nd Confederate Inf. 
J. T. Smoot
Pvt
Co. F, 20th Tenn. Cav. 
J. T. Smoot
Pvt
Co. E, 37th Tenn. Inf. 
J. T. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 7th Va. Cav. 
J. W. Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 3rd Ga. Reserves 
J. W. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 12th Bn. Va. Light Art. 
James Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 3rd Ga. Reserves 
James Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 25th La. Inf. 
James B. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 18th Va. Cav. 
James B. Smoot
Sergt
Co. A, 114th Va. Militia 
James D. Smoot
Bugler
Co. B, 1st Tex. Cav. 
James H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 38th Bn. Va. Light Art. 
James M. 
Smoot
Sergt
Co. G, 2nd Va. Inf. 


201


John Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 1st Ky. Cav. 
John Smoot
Pvt
Co. F, 42nd N. C. Inf. 
John Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 46th Tenn. Inf. 
John Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 34th Va. Militia 
John Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 1st Confederate Cav. 
John D. H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 51st Va. Inf. 
John E. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 19th Bn. Va. Heavy Art. 
John E. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 7th Va. Inf. 
John H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. --, 12th Va. Cav. 
John H. Smoot
1st Sergt
Co. E, 146th Va. Militia 
John J. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 1st Ky. Cav. 
John J. Smoot
3rd Lieut
Co. A, 29th Tex. Cav. 
John R. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 17th Ark. Inf. 
John T. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 46th Tenn. Inf. 
John T. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 19th Bn. Va. Heavy Art. 
John T. Smoot
Pvt
Co. I, 8th Va. Inf. 
John W. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 33rd N. C. Inf. 
Joseph C. Smoot
Sergt
Co. D, 19th Bn. Va. Heavy Art. 
Joseph K. Smoot
Pvt
Mosby's Regt. Va. Cav. 
Joseph K. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 1st Va. Inf. 
Joseph K. Smoot
Pvt
Co. F, 1st Va. Inf. 
Joseph R. Smoot
Pvt
1st Va. Cav., later Co. K, 1st Md. Cav. 
Joshua Smoot
2nd Lieut
Co. F, 8th S. C. Inf. 
Marcellus Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 63rd Va. Inf. 
N. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 1st Ala. Inf. 
Oliver Smoot
Pvt
Capt. Durand's Co., Tex. Cav. 
Oliver Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, Tex. Cav., Arizona Brig. 
Peter Smoot
Sergt
Co. B, 36th Va. Inf. 
Philip Smoot
Pvt
Co. E, 12th Va. Cav. 
Pinkney Smoot
Pvt
Co. F, 42nd N. C. Inf. 
R. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 25th Bn. Va. 
R. W. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 1st Bn. Va. Inf. Local Defense 
Richard Smoot
Pvt
Co. H, 3rd Tenn. Inf. 
Richard Smoot
Pvt
Co. K, 37th Bn. Va. Cav. 
Richard Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 5th Bn. Va. Inf. 
Richard H. 
Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 53rd Va. Inf. 
Robert Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 1st Bn. Ga. Reserves 
Robert Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 5th Va. Inf. 
Robert J. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 53rd Va. Inf. 
Robert N. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 19th Bn. Va. Heavy Art. 

202


S. A. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 31st Ala. Inf. 
S. C. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 9th Bn. Mo. Sharp Shooters 
S. G. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 2nd Va. Inf. 
Samuel Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 4th Mo. Cav. 
Samuel Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 16th Mo. Inf. 
Samuel Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 45th Bn. Va. Inf. 
Samuel A. Smoot
Corpl
Co. G, 31st Ala. Inf. 
Samuel B. Smoot
Pvt
Courtney Art. Va. 
Samuel C. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 9th Bn. Mo. Sharp Shooters 
Samuel J. Smoot
Sergt
Co. E, 34th Tex. Cav. 
Samuel J. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 2nd Va. Inf. 
Samuel S. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 9th Bn. Mo. Sharp Shooters 
Silas Smoot
Sergt
Co. F, 1st Mounted Rifles Of Ark. 
St. Clair M. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 5th Ky. Mounted Inf. 
T. R. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 12th Tenn. Inf. 
T. R. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 22nd Tenn. Inf. 
Thomas Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 62nd Va. Mounted Inf. 
Thomas B. Smoot
Corpl
Co. A, 24th Va. Cav. 
Thomas B. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 40th Bn. Va. Cav. 
Thomas D. Smoot
Corpl
Va. Light Art., Nelson's Bn. 
Thomas S. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 19th Va. Cav. 
W. A. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 1st Ky. Cav. 
W. A. Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 3rd Ky. Cav. 
W. F. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, Mosby's Va. Cav. 
W. H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 3rd Va. Inf. Local Defense 
W. J. Smoot
Surgeon
General Staff 
W. J. Smoot
Corpl
Co. F, Va. Reserves 
W. T. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, Mosby's Va. Cav. 
Wiley Smoot
Pvt
Co. I, 60th Va. Inf. 
William Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 3rd Ky. Cav. 
William Smoot
Pvt
Co. H, 16th Tex. Cav. 
William Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 6th Va. Inf. 
William Smoot
Pvt
Co. E, 54th Va. Militia 
William A. Smoot
Pvt
Co. H, 4th Va. Cav. 
William B. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 16th Tex. Cav. 
William F. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, 9th Va. Cav. 
William F. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, Mosby's Va. Cav. 
William H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 3rd Ark. Inf. 
William H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 6th Ga. Inf. State Guards 
William H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. D, 6th Tex. Cav. 

203


William H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. H, 15th Va. Inf. 
William H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. F, 41st Va. Cav. 
William H. Smoot
Pvt
Co. G, 34th Va. Inf. 
William R. Smoot
Pvt
Co. A, 26th Va. Inf. 
William W. Smoot
Pvt
Co. B, Martin's Regt., Tex. Cav. 
Willis Edward Smoot
Corpl
Co. D, Miles Legion La. 
Wilson D. Smoot
Pvt
Co. F, 42nd N. C. Inf. 
Wyley Smoot
Pvt
Co. C, 45th Bn. Va. Inf. 
A. H. Smoote
Pvt
Co. B, 2nd Bn. Ga. Sharp Shooters 
G. L. Smoote
Pvt
Co. D, 25th Miss. Inf. 
G. P. Smoote
Lieut
General Staff 
T. E. Smoote
Pvt
Co. I, 11th Ala. Cav. 
W. H. Smoote
2nd Lieut
Hunter's Regt. Mo. Cav. 


MISCELLANEOUS CONFEDERATE DATA

M. V. Smoot, Co. D, 2nd Ala. Regt. died Oct. 5, 1863, at Ross Hospital, 
Ala., $7.00 found on him were turned over to the Quartermaster. 
Peter Smoot, private, Co. G, 4th Fla. Regt., died or was killed, leaving 
$56.00. 

W. H. Smoot received at Dalton, Ga., on Nov. 22, 1862, from Surgeon 
Evans $17.00, the effects of his deceased son, Aubert Smoot, late of 
General Coxe's Battalion. 

Joseph R. Smoot, of Maryland, enlisted Apr. 8, 1862, at Richmond by 
Captain Gaither for two years or the duration of the war. He was assigned 
first to Co. K, 1st Va. Inf., but was later transferred to the 1st Md. Regt. 
He was last paid by Captain Davidson on Feb. 29, 1864. 

John Smoot, of Hampshire County, Va., a Confederate prisoner, took the 
oath of allegiance to the United States at Fort McHenry, Md., on Apr. 12, 
1863. 

Philip A. Smoot was blacksmith for the 12th Va. Cav. 

W. A. Smoot on June 3, 1865, of Co. F, 42nd N. C. Regt. took the oath of 
allegiance to the United States at Mocksville, N. C. 

Joshua Smoot enlisted Apr. 13, 1861, at Darlington, S. C., in Co. F, 8th 
S. C. Inf., and was appointed corporal a few days afterwards. On Nov. 1, 
1861, he was appointed sergeant; elected 3rd Lieut. of Co. M, 8th S. C. 
Inf.; wounded July 1, 1862, at Malvern Hill, and was furloughed to his 
home to recuperate. After the Battle of Gettysburg he was reported 
"missing", but it was later discovered that he died of wounds on the battle 
field. His regiment was attached to Kershaw's Old Brigade, Kershaw's 
Division, Longstreet's Corps, Army of Northern Virginia. 


205


Index


Abbey, John 135 

Abel, John Horn 136, 138, 139, 141 

Acton, Barbara 106 

Adair, Robert 59 

Adams, Benjamin 94

Charity 51

Eleanor 86

George 86

Henley 14

John 84, 86

Samuel 130 

Addison, Thomas 13 

Alexander, Anne 16, 29

Betty Lee 101

Ewell 16

Rawleigh 29

Sarah 16 

Allanson, Elizabeth 10

Thomas 11 

Allen, Sally 163 

Alley, Mary 85, 91

William 85, 86 

Almond, John 189 

Alsopp, William 2 

Anderson, Alexander 97

Charles 156

Eleanor 150

Elizabeth 88

Garland 155, 156, 157

Joseph 95

Margaret 150

Martha 186

Mary 30, 97

Nancy 97

Polly 152, 155

Richard 156

Taliaferro 97

William 83, 162 

Anderton, John 18, 19 

Andrews, Charles 157 

Apperson, Lewis 90 

Appler, David 186 

Ardery, William 59 

Arthis, Joseph 141 

Ashcomb, Lydia 9, 50 

Atkins, Mary 160, 162 

Atkinson, Margaret 172

William 172 

Atwickes, Elizabeth 7

Grace 3

Humphrey 3, 4, 7

James 3

Jean 3

William 3 

Austen (Austin), Eleanor 136

John 134, 136, 138

Samuel 149

Thomas 139 

Aven, Anna 105 


Bagby, Virginia 80 

Bailey, Norda 48 

Ballenger, Mary 64

Samuel 64 

Balthrope, Boles Tyre 13 

Bangs, Mary 40 

Barber, Luke 67. 

Barley, Amanda 146

Elizabeth 148

Jane 148

Samuel 148 

Barnes, Eleanor 61

Elizabeth 60

Matthew 61

Sarah 60

Victoria 61

William 61 

Barnhouse, Anne 137, 138

Rodolph 137 

Barricklow, Henry 126 

Barton, Elizabeth 50, 54, 107, 149, 194

Mary 54

Rachel 107

William 3, 4, 8, 52, 54, 56, 106, 107, 123. 

Bates, Landon 143 

Batten, Ashwell 2

Jane 3, 50

Margarey 50, 51

William 8, 50 

Beale, Anne 136, 141

George 139

John 124, 141

Josiah 141

Mary Magdaline 141

Sarah 141

William 141 

Bean, Addison 173

Azua 173

Bennett 139

Diana 173

Eleanor 52

Estella 173

George 173

Harriet 173

Henry 112

James 173

Joseph 173

Luella 173

Lydia 9

Margaret 173

Mary 138

Olive 173

Orea 173

Pauline 173

Ralph 4

Ross 173

Ruth 173

Seth 173

William 173 

Beauchamp, Linwood 44 

Beazlie, Lucy 78 

Beck, Audrey 180

Edward 180

Jack 180

Mary 180

Vermilla 180 

Bedinger, George 28 

Beebe, Calvin 173

David 173

Diana 173

George 173

Joseph 173

Reba 173 

Belcher, Donald 101 

Bell, Cyrus 21

Margaret 36

Sarah 21 

Bennett, Elizabeth 146

John 54, 55

Martha 79

Mary 55

Susan 143, 146

Thomas 139 

Benston, Leven 157 

Berry, Anne 137

James 137 

Berthy, Howard 127

James 127

Margaret 127

Mary 127

Maude 127 

Beshaugh, Peter 135 

Best, Josiah 40 

Birdwistle, Thomas 124 

Biscoe, Bennett 137, 139

Thomas 138 

Block, Nancy 173 

Blackburn, John 190

Sarah 190 

Blackwell, John 65, 66 

Blane, Elizabeth 186 

Blount, Susan 80 

Boarman, Alexander 94

John 53 

Bolton, Mabel 127 

Bonner, Elizabeth 8

Henry 8 

Boone, Daniel 163

John 153 

Bosher, Mary 33 

Boughton, Nannie 75 

Bouth, Robert 2 

Bowles, James 52

John 51, 52 

Boyd, Abner 97

Elizabeth 97 

Bozarth, Elizabeth 77

Jonathan 77 

Bradshaw, Elizabeth 39

Jacob 38 

Bramble, Archer 35

Cora 35

Edward 35

Elizabeth 35

Frances 35

Frank 35

George 35

Joseph 35

Mary 35 

Brandt, Anne 56, 106

Catherine 56

Margaret 108

Mary 20, 56, 106

Randolph 56, 57, 106, 132

Richard 57, 108, 112 

Browner, Barton 107

Basil 21, 22

Catherine 185

Elizabeth 22

Henry 107

Mary 115, 118

William 107 

Breerwood, Sarah 120 

Brennon, Martha 186 

Brightberry, Martha 148 

Brimhall, Sina 176

Victor 176

Wells 176


206


Briscoe, Edward 102, 118

Eleanor 106, 107

Elizabeth 110, 111

Hezekiah 107, 109, 110

John 107

Letitia 110

Mary 109, 110, 111

Sarah 57

William 102 

Brittingham, Martha 168

Virginia 166, 168

William 168 

Broadbent, Edward 177 

Broch, William 2 

Bromdon, Abraham 157 

Bronough, Mildred 187 

Brooke, Robert 50 

Broscuo, James 186 

Brown, Benjamin 28

Binford 91

Charles 161

Dixon 28

Eccleston 18

Elizabeth 85, 92

Gustavus 60

Hardin 28

Isaac 28

James 28

Jane 28

John 28

Lewis 28

Mahala 28

Maria 28

Mary 52, 99

Micajah 92

Norman 28

Owen 28

Samuel 92

Squire 28

Susanna 28

William 8, 85, 99

Willis 28 

Bryan, Joseph 46

Mary 46

Sarah 112, 116 

Bryant, Betty 135

Eleanor 135

John 134, 135

Lishay 135

Randall 132

Rebecca 134

William 135 

Buckner, Thornton 65

William 142 

Bullock, Electa 176

Isaac 176 

Burbage, Thomas 1, 4 

Burch, Benjamin 187

Walter 83 

Burke, Edmund 77

Solomon 126 

Burroughs, Samuel 85 

Burwell, Lewis 2 

Busey, Mary 48 

Bush, Pleasant 144 

Bushnell, Thomas 3 

Bussard, Daniel 186 

Butler, Andrew 101

Beckwith 188

Charles 101

Edward 101

Elizabeth 132

Groce 101 


Cage, John 8

Margarey 7

William 123 

Cain, Thomas 157 

Caldwell, Abner 156 

Calloway, Joseph 43 

Calvert, Charles 4

Leonard 4

Philip 8 

Campbell, Phoebe 176, 182 

Canady, Anne 142

Thomas 142, 143

Wharton 142 

Cane, John 55 

Cannon, Elizabeth 35, 44

Luke 13

Truston 44 

Canter, James 83 

Cardon, Ariel 178

John 178

Reed 178

Robert 178 

Careiess, Thomas 54 

Carey, Frances 122 

Carlin, Martha 172 

Carnes, Hal 105 

Carrico, Elizabeth 86

James 83, 86

Peter 86 

Carter, Beverley 188

William 188 

Carver, John 13 

Cazey, William 156 

Casseton, Robert 55 

Castleton, James 180

Jay 180 

Cator, Margaret 120 

Caulk, Daniel 19, 22 

Cawood, Benjamin 67 

Chancellor, Samuel 99 

Chandler, Anne 12, 26

Bethialand 26

John 12, 13, 111

Mary 12

Sarah 13

Stephen 12, 13, 26

William 12, 137 

Chapman, Samuel 111 

Chappelear, Mary 63 

Charter, Thomas 124 

Cheatham, Eva 169, 170

Cheshire, Lou 166, 169 

Chesley, Elizabeth 58 

Chum, Levy 15 

Clagett, Horatio 114 

Clamroach, David 151

George 151 

Clark, Frances 141, 144

George 58

John 58, 62

Mary 144

Richard 140

Susannah 58

William 139 

Clawson, Rebecca 177, 183 

Clayvelle, Drucilla 47 

Clement, Godfrey 99

John 99, 144 

Cobb, Catherine 171 

Codd, George 1 

Cole, John 21, 28 

Coleman, Aline 176

Genevieve 176

Jacob 176

James 176

Martha 176

Robert 176

Sherman 176

Thomas 135 

Collings, John 188 

Collingswood, Robert 7 

Compton, John 115

Violetta 109, 115

William 108 

Conder, Ellen 177 

Connaway, Nicholas 85 

Conrey, Hilda 46

Norwood 46 

Cook, Jane 62

John 153

Thomas 62 

Cookhagen, Margaret 56

Tobias 56 

Cooley, Daniel 191 

Coombs, Richard 11 

Coon, Jennie 158 

Cope, Joseph 150 

Cordy, Geneva 47 

Cornwallys, Thomas 4 

Cottrell, Charles 91, 92

James 62

Mary 91

Samuel 92 

Courtney, Milly 87 

Courts, Charles 60

William 107 

Cowan, Stella 181 

Cowhert, Frances 188, 189

Jonathan 189

Reuben 189 

Cox, Hugh 93 

Crain (Crane), John 136

Mary 136

Nannie 73

Robert 136, 137

Sarah 136

Thomas 136, 137

William 136, 137 

Craner, George 126 

Crawley, Mancah 96 

Creducle, George 8 

Crittenden, Anna 118, 121

Joel 187

William 121 

Crampkin, John 124 

Cromwell, Edward 161

Minnie 161 


207


Crook, Margaret 71

Zephenia 71 

Croom, Thomas 170 

Cropper, Catherine 18

Elizabeth 17, 18

John 17, 18

Zadoc 17, 18 

Crosby, Phoebe 144 

Crosley, Olley 71

Polly 71

Sylvanus 71 

Cross, George 118 

Cull, Robert 11 

Cummins, Margaret 143 

Curry, Ivy 47 

Curtis, Abraham 189 


Dale, Abraham 6

Elizabeth 27, 39

William 27 

Dalton, John 137 

Damron, Joseph 176 

Dana, Marian 81 

Daniel, Eleanor 158 

Darby, Nancy 43 

Darne, Anne 32

William 32 

Davis, Anne 83

Edward 83

Elizabeth 44, 82, 83

James 157

John 2

Nathan 192

Sam 188

Walter 8 

Dayvault, Alexander 166

Andrew 166

David 166

James 166

Lelia 166

Mary 166

Meek 166

Rebecca 168

Virginia 166

William 166 

Decker, Brigham 175 

Deerego, John 11

William 9, 10, 11 

Dement, John 34

Julia 34

William 34 

Dennis, Batson 146

Dorothy 144, 146 

Dent, Alexander 82, 93, 94

Catherine 82, 94

Columbia 94

Ella 94

George 57, 94

Gideon 93, 94

Hatch 94

Henry 102

Hugh 94

Jane 82

Lydia 94

Martha 86, 93

Mary 93, 94

Nathan 82

Stoughton 94, 115

Theophilus 94

Thomas 82

William 82 

Derring, John 175 

Dickson, Solomon 153 

Diggs, Edward 65 

Dixon, Allie 176

Arthur 176

Helen 176

Le Roy 176

Mauine 176

Paul 176

Sarah 176

Vera 176

William 176 

Dodson, Anne 185

Eleanor 59

Henry 59

John 59

Margaret 60, 66

Middleton 59

Robert 59

Sarah 59

Walter 66, 67

William 185 

Donaldson, Sabina 13 

Doney, Hannah 125 

Dorman, John 3 

Dorney, Philip 56 

Dorsey, Jemina 126

John 126

William 33 

Douglas, Alexander 18

Anne 61, 84

Benjamin 61

Elizabeth 13, 17, 30

Jacob 118

James 118

Joseph 17, 30, 134

Thomas 13 

Dowdy, Jesse 161 

Downing, Harriet 89, 99

Henry 89 

Doyle, James 23 

Draper, Richard R. 6 

Drury, William 21 

Dubose, William 25 

Duncan, Mary 164 

Dunnington, John 22 

Durham, Dorothy 6

John 6

Joseph 6

Margaret 6

Samuel 54

Sarah 6

Thomas 6 

Dusenberry, Abraham 172

Ada 172

Aurilla 172

Cora 172

Earle 172

Edith 172

Eva 172

George 174

Lorena 172

Margaret 174

Martha 174

Warren 174

Wilson 172 

Dutton, Gerard 10

Judith 10, 129

Matthew 10, 11, 123

Notley 10

Thomas 10 

Duval, Obadiah 92 

Dwiggins, Henry 169 

Dyson, Basil 157

John 111 


Easton, Mary 23, 24

Sara 23

William 23 

Edelen, Robert 111 

Edmonds, Elizabeth 120 

Edwards, Elizabeth 82

Hugh 46

Katherine 11

Lancelot 30

Matthew 124

Rich 30

Richard 63, 185

Susannah 94

William 46 

Effinger, Laura 79 

Egerton, Anne 108, 112

Bennett 112

Charles 112

Mary 112 

Eldredge, Alpha 178

Diana 173

Horace 178

Ira 173 

Ellet, Richard 6 

Elliot, John 134

William 135 

Ellis, John 85

Robert 132

Stephen 85

Susannah 85

William 86 

Emmons, James 188 

Estes, Nancy 69, 75

Sarah 75 

Euster, Adopheus 191 

Everet, Nancy 135 

Eyer, Daniel 45

Jane 42, 45 


Famsley, Frances 68 

Farrand, Catherine 82, 86

Hezekiah 86

John 86

Zephaniah 87 

Fauntleroy, William 5, 88 

Fausett, Harriet 173 

Fearson, Joseph 187

Mary Anne 187 

Feddeman, Henry 30

Margaret 30

Mary 30 

Fendell, Benjamin 82

John 61

Josias 5, 51

Philip 61

Sarah 61 

Fenwick, John 129, 138

Richard 141 

Finley, Edward 122

Julia 122

Robert 122 

Fisger, Mary 175 

Fisher, Mary 181 

Flagg, Elizabeth 20, 21 

Fleming, Robert 167 

Fletcher, John 125

Lovina 39, 44 

Fletshall, Thomas 124 

Flint, Thomas 189 

Ford, Anne 15

Charles Allison 15

Edward 10, 53, 111

Elizabeth 10

John 16

Posthuma 9, 10

Raccon 188

William 108 

Forrest, Thaddeus 135 

Fowke, Lydia 22

Thomas 22 


208


Fox, Christine 42

Dorothy 42

Duane 42

Frank 42

Newton 42

Perrin 42 

Fraser, Frances 117 

Frazier, Ariminta 21, 36 

Freeman, Adeline 143

Anne 143

Arthur 143

Columbus 143

Elizabeth 143

Frances 143

James 97

Jemina 143

John 143, 175

Levi 143

Margaret 143, 175

Martha 143

Martishia 143

Rosaline 143

William 143 

French, David 117

Frances 117 

Friese, Ida 49 

Fulford, William 153 

Fuller, Elizabeth 120 

Fullmer, Lola 182 


Gaither, Ashberry 164

Burgess 164

Elizabeth 150

Gassaway 150

Mary 150

Walter 150 

Gardner, Edward 14, 134

George 94

Joseph 137 

Garm, Daniel 175

Mahala 175

Philip 175 

Garner, Hezekiah 64 

Gassaway, Elizabeth 32 

Gatewood, James 68 

Gee, John 9 

Gehring, Martha 178, 184 

Gerard, Thomas 53

William 83, 88 

Gibbens, Sarah 172 

Gibbons, Thomas 94, 132 

Gibson, Anna 48

Catherine 145

Trenton 25 

Giddens, Margaret 169, 171 

Gill, Anne 91

Erasmus 91

Henry 91

Lydia 84, 90 

Glascock, James 156 

Glass, John 82 

Glazier, Charles 174

Dorothy 174

Forrest 174

Helen 174

Maline 174

Martha 174

Nyle 174 

Goff, Allon 159

Lucy 159

Rosa 159 

Golden, Ancil 182

Harold 182 

Goldsmith, John 132 

Goodrick, Edward 107

Frances 107

George 132

Mary 106

Sylvester 26 

Gordon, Alexander 133

Ella 100 

Gordy, Geneva 48, 49 

Grady, Elizabeth 6 

Graham, Asher 104

Patrick 185

Sarah 100, 104 

Grant, Christian 84

Elizabeth 16, 27

James 84, 85 

Graves, John 143

Joseph 143, 149

Philip 149 

Gray, Anne 87

Anthony 87

Edward 87

George 87

Mary 87, 115

Roger 87 

Greear, John 161

Peyton 161

Sara 161

Troy 161 

Greene, Agatha 65

George 65

James 66

Leonard 129

Rebecca 139 

Griffith, Fannie 47

Mary 162

William 47 

Grimes, Mary 79

William 79 

Gross, Cynthia 77 

Groves, John 11, 12

Mary 11

Posthuma 11, 12

William 11 

Gwyther, Elizabeth 56, 57, 58

George 58

William 58, 185 


Hackett, Eliza 43, 46

Lavica 35, 43

Luke 43

Thomas 46 

Hadden,

see Haydon. 

Hagon, Robert 138 

Haines, Mary 125, 126 

Half, Kathlean 161

Thomas 161 

Hall, Edgar 162

George 43

Grace 162

Henry 36

Leland 162

William 162 

Hamill, John 13, 57

Sarah 12, 13 

Hamm, Adelene 103

Joseph 151 

Hammersley, Francis 137 

Handy, Caroline 112

Charles 112

George 112

Hezekiah 112

Maria 112

Richard 112 

Hanks, Sarah 6

William 6 

Hanna, Alexander 11

James 150, 156 

Hansard, Emily 158 

Hansborough, Alexander 189

Elizabeth 189 

Hanson, Elizabeth 106, 110

Walter 4, 66, 110, 111 

Harbert, William 54 

Harbin, Caswell 167 

Hardy, Avera 173

Josiah 173

Le Grand 173

Milton 173

Morrow 173

Thethe 173 

Hargraves, James 112

Richard 112 

Harper, David 32

William 36 

Harris, Betsy 89, 99

Elizabeth 26, 106

Gwynn 26

John 9, 26

Joseph 26

Morgan 26

Nathan 26

Thomas 26, 99, 106

Violetta 26

Zachariah 172 

Harrison, Amelia 94, 101

Eleanor 161

Hannah 43

James 124

John 86

Richard 54

William 136 

Hart, Aaron 38 

Hartley, Earl 127

Mary 127

Pearl 127

Ray 127 

Hatch, John 4

William 5 

Hater, John 8 

Hatton, Thomas 53 

Hawes, Thomas 134 

Hawkins, Alexander 56, 57, 60

Anne 163

Caleb 67

Catherine 57

Eleanor 56

Elizabeth 56, 57, 66, 73, 110

Henry 56, 57, 106, 110

John 67, 163

Joseph 109

Josiah 109, 115

Letitia 110

Sarah 56, 109

Smith 108

Thomas 57, 73

Tubman 56

William 163, 164 

Haws, Edna 181 

Hawton, John 130

Thomas 123

William 11, 123, 129, 130 

Haydon, James 65

Joseph 38

Peregrina 65

Susannah 65 

Head, Charles 41

Edward 40

Mary 32, 40 

Hearne, Ava 35

Daniel 35

Lucy 35

Mary 35

William 35 

 209

Heaton, Abigail 95, 102 

Helden, Charles 154

George 154

John 154

Rose 154 

Helms, Isaac 126

Elizabeth 194 

Hendershott, Elizabeth 125 

Henley, Alexander 166

Francis 166

Henry 8, 21

Hezekiah 92

John 166

Joseph 166

Mary 168

Pearl 166

Robert 51, 53, 141

Sanford 166

William 85 

Henrick, Susan 188, 189 

Henry, Mary 48

William 48 

Hepburn, John 124 

Herbert, John 26 

Hett, Alexander 97

Elizabeth 89, 97

Hannah 97

Harrison 97

Peter 97

Presley 84, 87

Thaddeus 97 

Hicks, Henry 157 

Hill, Emily 172

John 172

Joseph 2

William 145 

Hinton, Grace 3

Thomas 3 

Hipkins, Elizabeth 23

Leroy 23

Sarah 23, 24 

Hirst, Rebecca 89 

Hitch, Alexander 89

Christopher 88, 95

Margaret 87, 95

Susannah 83, 88 

Hodgins, Daisy 169 

Hodson, Rosannah 13, 19

Thomas 19, 32 

Hollam, Jennie 177, 183 

Holman, Isaac 164

Jacob 164

Mary 164

Nancy 158 

Holmead, James 124 

Hook, John 44 

Hopkins, Mandyville 162

Murray 162

Raymond 162 

Hopper, Hannah 97

Humphrey 97 

Horsley, George 179

Golden 179

Zella 179 

Horst, Esther 48 

Hoskins, Walter 111

William 110 

Howard, Susan 127

William 9, 57, 157 

Howell, Abraham 137 

Hudnalls, Joseph 30 

Hudson, Catherine 121 

Hughes, John 94

Richmond 89 

Hughey, Jacob 157

John 157

Robert 157 

Hume, Joseph 148

Lucy 148 

Humphrey, John 27 

Hungerford, Barton 134

William 3, 4, 52 

Hunter, John 189 

Huntington, Zina 177 

Hurd, Mildred 48 

Hurst, Harlow 183

Lillian 183 

Hurtt, Albert 44 

Huskinson, Nephi 175 


Iglehart, John 108 

Ijams, Beale 156

Brice 163

Polly 163

William 156 

Inglesby, Richard 8 

Inglow, John 5 

Iverson, June 180

Louis 180

Ruth 180 


Jackson, Anna 40

Jonathan 41

Patrick 40, 41

Thomas 18 

Jameson, Enoch 188 

Jarrell, Martha 155, 160 

Jarvis, William 153 

Jeffries, Mildred 97, 104 

Jenifer, Daniel 60, 61

Daniel of St. Thomas 60

Elizabeth 62, 142

John Reed 62

Margaret 152 

Jenkins, Philip 11

Posthuma 11

Thomas 186 

Jennings, Pauline 122

Sebastian 25 

Jett, Elizabeth 103

Frances 190

Francis 190 

Johns, Richard 185 

Johnson, Arthur 104

Baker 155

Elmer 104

Eva 104

Mary 91 

Jolly, John 117 

Jones, Anne 137, 163

Charles 55, 189

Elizabeth 27, 40

Lewis 88

Mary 112, 175, 180

Roland 41

Sarah 192 

Joyce, Robert 50 


Kanfelt, Sally 101

Thomas 101 

Kedger, Robert 4 

Keech, Charity 111

George 111

James 63 

Keene, Keziah 18, 32 

Keeports, George 109 

Kennedy, Catherine 15

Clement 13, 15, 33, 34

Daniel 21, 185

David 21, 22

Elizabeth 15, 33

Lydia 15

Mary 21, 34

Pamelia 34 

Kenrick, Emily 43, 46

Joseph 46 

Key, Philip 15 

Killough, David 114

Elizabeth 114

Frank 114 

Kimball, Helen 173

Sarah 37 

Kincaid, Joseph 90 

King, Catherine 175, 181

Mary 68

Naomi 173 

Kingsland, Anne 82

William 82 

Kirkham, Charlotte 187 

Knight, William 151 

Krim, Jacob 96 

Kykendall, Nathaniel 190 


Lacey, Joseph 115 

Laine, John 20 

Lambert, James 53 

Lanham, Eleanor 78 

Lankford, Nancy 46 

Lanyon, Lavon 79

Reuben 79 

Larson, Mary 174, 179 

Latimore, Arthur 26

Elizabeth 26

Thomas 26 

Laub, Andrew 42

Sarah 42 

Lawrence, James 108 

Le Compte, Samuel 36 

Lee, Anna 122

Amelia 18, 19

Charles 122

Clinton 122

Edwin 122

Fitzhugh 122

Gordon 122

John 14

Launcelot 18

Philip Ludwell 14

Richard 14

Robert 122


 210


Siana 92

Thomas 122

Virginia 122 

Legatt, Bridget 8

John 8 

Lewis, Ailen 77

Archibald 77

Effie 121, 122

James 122

Lucy 122

Mildred 77

Susannah 75

Linn 164

John 164 

Linster, John 89, 90

Moses 89 

Little, John 153, 157

Samuel 153 

Litz, Kate 161 

Lloyd, Reubin 139

Thomas 140 

Lock, Jesse 63

John 156

Mary 63 

Lofton, Frances 11 

Loftus, John 10, 11 

Logan, Phyllis 80

Rebecca 68 

Loker, Elizabeth 152, 154

Margaret 154

Rebecca 154

Thomas 154, 155 

Love, Samuel 82

William 51 

Lowe, Phoebe 112 

Lower, Michael 153 

Luckett, Samuel 132 

Lynch, Stephen 20, 21, 23 

Lyons, Henrietta 150

Robert 140 


McCawley, James 141 

McClamrock, Martha 151 

McCome, William 153 

McConnell, Oliver 186 

McCormick, William 190 

McCullough, Rosalie 76 

McDowell, Marcellus 42 

McFarlane, Alice 77, 80

William 80 

McFarling, John 75 

McGarth, Martha 47 

McGill, Neal 90 

McGirt, Leila 171 

McGrath, Martha 45 

McGuire, Anne 25

James 151 

Mackall, John 155

Rebecca 154 

McKenna, Martha 186 

Mackey, Stephen 138 

McLean, Edgar 25

William 25 

McMeans, Anthony 172

Esther 172

Margaret 172 

McNeal, Andrew 118

Harriet 112, 118 

McNeilly, Walter 49 

McPherson, Alexander 196

Elizabeth 106

Harriet 106

Henry 106

John 59, 60, 130, 187

Mary 106, 187

Richard 185

Robert 185

Samuel 185

Thomas 106

William 106, 130 

McQueen, George 104 

McQuire, Elizabeth 120

Marietta 120

William 120 

Maddox, James 107

John 130

Notley 4, 60

Townley 25

William 10 

Mahan, David 127 

Mandell, John 129 

Manley, Columbia 154

Daniel 154

Edward 154

Marion 154, 159, 161

Mary 154

William 154 

Manners, George 52

Lydia 52 

Marbury, John 187

Leonard 9 

March, John 155, 157 

Marcus, Elizabeth 88 

Marshall, George 189

John 66

Sarah 14 

Marston, Martha 144, 147

Susan 147

William 147 

Martenstein, Austen 77 

Martin, Henry 60, 74

Rebecca 158

Sarah 67

William 55 

Mason, Anne 69, 75

William 44, 135 

Massie, Hope 79

Irene 77, 79

Robert 86

Thomas 79 

Mattingly, Ignatius 185 

Mattax, Edward 56 

Medley, Ambrose 145

Frances 145

Harriet 142, 145

Mary 145 

Meeks, Ludwith 27

Sarah 27, 39 

Melone, John 153

Rebecca 152, 153 

Menefy, George 2 

Micenhammer, Mary 168 

Middleton, Charles 35

George 35

Ignatius 107

William 35 

Milburn, Elizabeth 138, 139 

Millard, Dora 178

Martha 178 

Miller, Madge 45

Susan 117 

Milstead, Samuel 185

Thomas 185 

Mims, Harriet 25

Samuel 25 

Minitree, Eleanor 16

Paul 16 

Mitchell, Anne 186

Edward 30

Frances 186

Joseph 186

Matilda 192

Richard 84

Thomas 7

William 13 

Mongrel, Sarah 146 

Montgomery, Elijah 25

Eliza 24 

Moore, John 133

Mary 42, 46

Vianna 147

William 46 

Moran, Zachariah 85 

Morgan, Benjamin 139

Daniel 27, 96

Francis 2, 4

William 137 

Morris, Richard 4, 10, 108

Thomas 52, 123

Walter 61 

Morrison, Anna 174

Morris 174

Nina 161 

Morse, Sarah 197 

Morton, Joseph 83, 84

Margaret 119

Sarah 119 

Muckleroy, Bryan 6 

Mulligan, William 154 

Murdock, John 33 

Murray, William 75 

Musgroves, Catherine 17 

Muskett, Mary 111 


Nalley, Aaron 107

John 107

Nathan 107

Richard 107 

Naylor, George 186 

Neale, Jeremiah 124

John 89

Matthew 89 

Neel, Annie 161

Bess 161 

Neely, Francis 150, 164, 165

Mary 164, 165

Nathan 167

Richard 164, 165

Temperance 163, 164

William 150 

Nelson, Elizabeth 71

John 71

Margaret 71

Thomas 71

William 163 

Nesbit, Margaret 174, 180 

 211

Nevit, Peregrine 26 

Newell, Afton 174

Alice 174

Annie 174

Clyde 174

Elliott 174

Emma 174

Flora 174

Helen 174

Mary 174

Morris 174

Myron 174 

Newgent, Dominic 6

Margaret 6 

Newman, Alexander 5

George 9, 50, 51, 52

Lydia 7, 9, 51

Margarey 51

William 51, 132 

Newton, Louisa Maria 42 

Nibley, Alice 178, 183

Carlyle 178

Owen 178

Reed 178 

Nichols, Rebecca 30 

Nolting, Ernest 45

Mary 45

William 45 

Norman, Courtney 95

Elizabeth 28

Ezekiel 95

John 95

Mary 95

Milly 95

Nancy 95

William 95 

Norris, Eleanor 47 

Northcraft, Hannah 76 

Northmore, Joseph 45 

Norton, Joseph 90 

Notley, Thomas 7 

Nowell, Gilbert 153 


Oakes, Jesse 156 

O'Brien, Lavania 34, 43

Matthew 43 

O'Cane, Gerard 10

James 10

Judith 10

Lydia 10 

Offenbacher, Sarah 127 

Olmstead, Martha 173 

Owen, Jemina 143 

Owens, Edward 188 


Padgett, Jonathan 115 

Pairo, Mary 187 

Palmer, Susan 97

Thomas 97 

Parker, Elizabeth 17

Ella 180

Sarah 173

Susannah 96 

Parkinson, Anita 178, 183

Nettie 176, 182

Samuel 182 

Parnham, John 108, 196 

Parrott, Elizabeth 120

John 120 

Paul, Alice 127, 128 

Payne, Albert 145

Colston 87

Mary 96

Nancy 87

Richard 190

William 65 

Peale, Mary 104 

Pearson, John 99

Richmond 99 

Peck, Benjamin 144

George 144

Hezekiah 144

Ida 144

Margaret 144

Melvina 144

Phoebe 144 

Peircy, Thomas 7 

Pemberton, George 13 

Penn, Anne 12

Elizabeth 115

John 10

Mark 11, 12, 123 

Perrine, Elizabeth 90, 100

William 100 

Perry, John 116

Mary 116 

Peter, Agnes 33

George 33

Robert 34 

Peters, Edmond 2 

Philpot, Benjamin 58

Bryant 135

Edward 56

Elizabeth 58, 62 

Pickell, George 65

Martin 65, 66 

Pickler, Joseph 90 

Pierpant, Clarence 173

Clifford 173

George 173

John 173

Margaret 173

Naomi 173

Pauline 173

Ruth 173

Thomas 173

Vilote 173 

Pleasants, Joseph 33

William 33 

Plecker, Jacob 145 

Plummer, Addie 46 

Pollard, John 80

Lalla 80

Virginia 80 

Pope, Francis 7

Lawrence 133

Nathaniel 134 

Posey, Charles 198

Mary 26, 37

Vincent 37 

Poston, Henry 93 

Pound, Ambrose 122

Carey 122

Frances 122

James 122

Ralston 122 

Powell, Alfred 23

Harriett 117

Susan 127

William 127 

Powers, Janney 85, 92 

Prather, John 157 

Price, Columbus 167

Eleanor 137, 138, 156

John 138

Sterling 45

William 157, 167 

Pruitt, Harrod 89, 99 

Pumphrey, Lloyd 186 

Pye, Edward 94 


Radcliffe, Elizabeth 59, 63

Joseph 59

Joshua 131 

Ranson, Addie 76

Augustus 76 

Ray, Thomas 163 

Rea, John 102 

Rebentisch, Anne 178

Grover 178

Hamilton 178 

Redd, Mary 92, 101

Temple 101 

Redfield, Chloe 175 

Reed, Elizabeth 32

Ezekiel 30, 32

John 7

Thomas 193 

Reeder, John 137 

Reese, Elwood 194

Leslie 194 

Renscher, Richard 139, 140

William 140 

Renshaw, Abraham 149

Esther 149

Isaiah 149 

Reynolds, Sarah 23 

Ricketts, Amy 181 

Riddle, Bernice 181

Clell 181

Garn 181

Kenneth 181

Madora 181

Margaret 181

Orin 181 

Riley, Anne 27

Martha 75

Nancy 38, 39 

Ringgold, Walter 186 

Roans, Walter 4 

Roberts, Benjamin 27

Ethel 77

Maria 174

Thomas 83 

Robertson, Amos 35

Daniel 21, 22

Janet 22

Mary 35

Rebecca 35 

Robey, Barton 112 

Robinson, Arnold 173

George 173

Joseph 173

Lydia 103, 105

Martha 173 

Roe, Ariel 192 

Rogers, Hester 173

William 89 

Rose, Littleberry 163

Mary 46 

Ross, Mary 181

Sallie 122 

Rossan, Reuben 188 
 212

Rouse, Helen 47 

Rowland, Robert 8, 52, 53 

Rowlett, Anne 141, 143

Jemina 143

William 143 

Russell, George 43 

Ryan, Ida 77, 79

Katherine 41

Sallie 80 


Sager, Alma 127 

Sain, Gasper 151 

Saint Clair, George 140 

Sampson, Thomas 6 

Sanders, John 11 

Sansbury, Martha 106 

Schwartz, Sophia 47 

Scott, Charles 65 

Scriver, Thomas 26 

Scrogen, Joseph 15 

Sellman, Thomas 108 

Semmes, Raphael 187 

Semple, John 60 

Sessions, Martha 175

Peregrine 175 

Sewell, Charles 107

Cuthbert 129

James 54 

Shank, Catherine 125, 126 

Shaw, Neal 16

Thomas 86 

Shearly, George 135 

Shepherd, Charles 102

Elmina 174

Mary 122

Royal 92 

Shivley, Henry 68 

Shoaf, Laura 168 

Shorter, Mahalabel 38 

Shriver, Carrie 42

Harry 42 

Shumate, John 84 

Sibert, Elizabeth 145 

Sides, Sarah 110 

Sinnett, Garrett 55 

Slaughter, Cadawalder 27

George 27

James 27

Stanton 65 

Slingluff, Alice 42 

Sloan, Brittania 150 

Smallwood, Dorothy 41

Emma 33, 41

Thomas 41 

Smart, Charlotte 182 

Smith, Abraham 144

Anne 30, 32

Ardella 21, 36

Arietta 30

Benjamin 30

Biscoe 149

Charles 30, 45

David 132

Emma 144

George 30, 35

Hazel 47

James 11, 114

John 30, 71

Joseph 30, 144

Lucy 159

Martha 168

Martishia 144

Mary 21, 30, 35

Matthew 30, 36

Olivia 30

Phoebe 103

Priscilla 30

Robert 132

Samuel 51, 144

Sarah 144

Thomas 144

Verlinda 71 

Smoot: 
Abigail 68, 82

Abraham 141, 144, 172, 173, 174, 176, 177, 182

Ada 189

Addie 181

Addison 159

Adeline 25, 102, 116

Agnes 114, 174

Albert 175, 181, 182, 199

Alene 178

Alexander 21, 22, 23, 49, 58, 61, 62, 67, 68, 94, 102,
137, 138, 156, 157,  158, 160, 163, 164, 166, 167, 168,
169, 199

Alexander Stoddert 13, 14, 15, 22, 23, 24

Alfred 199

Algernon 31

Alice 3, 40, 174, 183

Alleghany 117

Allie 176, 184

Alma 178

Almira 192

Alonzo 194, 197

Alsinda 72

Amanda 33, 189, 192

Amelia 17, 18, 66, 67, 73, 102, 131

Andrew 73, 145, 190

Anita 183

Anna 36, 40, 105, 174, 182

Anne 3, 6, 12, 14, 16, 28, 30, 35, 38, 41, 44, 49, 54,
57, 60, 70, 75,  78, 80, 83, 84, 85, 93, 101, 103, 108,
109, 112, 114, 115, 117,  131, 132, 134, 137, 138, 141,
142, 154, 159, 160, 166, 178,  186, 188, 189, 194

Annella 180

Annis 170

Archibald 23, 36

Arlemisa 103

Arlety 191

Arminta 33

Armistead 27, 38, 39

Arnold 182

Arrietta 30

Arthur 77, 79, 82, 83, 86, 93, 94, 101, 104, 116

Aryanna 89

Asenath 84, 97

Aubert 203

Aubrey 47

Auburt 193

Augustus 199

Auny 138, 149

Ausman 199

Austin 136, 137, 138, 139

Avery 33, 41

Balsora 76

Barbara 118

Bathenea 38

Bathia 128

Barton 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 63, 85, 87, 91, 124,
125, 134, 135, 138,  149, 185, 194, 196

Benjamin 37, 69, 74, 75, 78, 82, 85, 86, 91, 93, 94,
100, 101, 116, 146,  148, 188, 190, 197, 199

Benjamin 
Stoddert 13, 15, 24, 25, 42, 46

Bessie 162

Beth 175

Bethialand 26 


213


Smoot (cont.): 

Betsy 83, 85, 89, 101

Brigham 174, 180

Briscoe 118, 121, 122

Brittania 150

Burton 199

Caleb 136, 137, 138, 149, 151, 199

Calvin 29, 127

Carey 84

Carlos 162

Carol 178

Caroline 77, 112, 190, 191

Cass 195

Catherine 17, 18, 60, 61, 85, 86, 87, 108, 116,
117, 145, 185, 190, 191

Caty 89

Cecelia 103

Cesla 75

Chandler 28

Charity 87, 125

Charles 16, 17, 28, 29, 30, 33, 36, 38, 41, 42, 54,
57, 68, 76, 80, 84, 85,  90, 94, 100, 103, 106, 107,
108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114,  116, 118, 121,
122, 127, 128, 155, 158, 160, 183, 187, 193, 197, 199

Charles Calvert 112, 116, 118, 119, 121

Charlotte 89, 99, 187

Chloe 19, 178, 185, 191

Christian 85

Christiana 117

Christine 48

Christopher 192

Cinderella 146

Claiborne 87, 96, 103

Clara 127

Clement 33, 45

Cleo 177

Clinton 171

Clio 183

Colleen 182

Conder 177

Cora 119, 127, 169

Cordelia 194

Courtney 95, 103

Creed 191, 200

Cuthbert 136, 137, 149, 152

Cynthia 154

Daniel 116, 118, 194, 195, 200

Daniel Jenifer 142, 143, 144, 145, 152, 153, 155,
156, 157, 160, 162

David 16, 37, 38, 44, 118, 191, 197, 198

Deborah 73, 85, 86

De Clifford 159

Delmar 162

Demarius 76

Demianne 191

Dewitt 200

Diana 178

Dixon 196

Dona 178

Dorothy 147

Douglas 177, 183

Drazilla 144

Earl 81, 127, 194

Edgar 77, 80, 104, 127, 162, 178, 193

Edith 35

Edmond 147, 197

Edna 178, 180

Edward 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 19, 21, 25, 32,
36, 41, 50, 63, 80, 82,  83, 84, 87, 88, 89, 97,
98, 99, 109, 115, 124, 129, 132, 169, 170,
171, 191, 196, 197

Edwin 105

Effie 193

Elbert 147, 192

Eleanor 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 37, 38, 45, 57, 58, 59,
60, 86, 108, 109, 133,  134, 137, 139, 150, 157

Electa 176

Eli 185

Elijah 27, 28, 38, 39, 40

Eliphal
et 152, 153, 156, 158

Elisha 152, 153, 157

Eliza 23, 30, 42, 148, 161, 192

Elizabeth 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 20, 21, 22, 24, 27,
29, 30, 36, 38, 40, 41, 44, 54,  56, 58, 60, 62, 63,
68, 75, 83, 87, 90, 92, 93, 95, 97, 100, 101,  103,
106, 107, 109, 114, 115, 125, 137, 138, 142, 145, 150,
155, 160, 162, 163, 173, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192,
194

Ella 75, 173

Ellen 122, 191

Elva 181

Elwen 89

Emile 120

Emily 40, 158

Emma 42, 45, 105, 194

Enoch 88, 96, 97

Erma 177

Ernest 46, 78, 178, 184

Essie 161

Estella 44

Ethel 127

Eva 127

Evaline 191

Evelyne 45, 126, 181

Fern 176, 182

Ferrol 181

Fidelia 192

Fielding 147

Flora 160

Florence 47, 81, 119

Forrest 48

Frances 38, 61, 72, 88, 103, 122, 134, 145, 147, 189

Francis 49, 186, 192

Frank 161, 200

Frederick 45

Gabriel 191, 196

Galloway 191

Geneva 49

Genevieve 180 

214

Smoot (cont.): 

George 57, 64, 71, 75, 86, 87, 93, 94, 101, 102, 103,
112, 116, 117,  136, 137, 138, 141, 142, 143, 144,
146, 147, 148, 158, 161,  174, 179, 180, 186, 187,
192, 193, 194, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200

George Clark 58, 61, 62, 68

Georgianna 104

Gerard 73

Gideon 116, 197

Grace 3, 4, 5, 127, 151, 161

Gulia 44

Hannah 58, 104, 191

Hanson 110

Harlon 46

Harlow 178, 183

Harold 47, 80, 81, 127, 178

Harriet 98, 116, 122, 126, 145, 155, 194

Harvey 47, 194

Hattie 127

Healthy 20, 26

Helen 177, 181

Helena 45

Hendley 57, 106, 107, 108

Henrietta 65, 66, 72, 127, 150

Henry 13, 14, 15, 18, 21, 22, 30, 57, 64, 70,
71, 100, 116, 120, 126,  147, 159, 185, 197,
200

Hester 145

Hettie 161

Hezekia
h 108, 112, 113, 118, 119, 137, 138, 139, 140,
155, 159, 160

Hiram 147, 196, 197

Hironage 125

Homer 47, 48, 49

Hope 80

Horace 145, 174, 177, 178

Horatio 16, 20, 25, 26, 185

Humphrey 27, 39, 44

Hangerford 73

Ida 79, 117, 174, 194

Iffee 191

Ira 38, 45

Iris 181

Irma 162

Irving 47, 49

Isaac 56, 57, 58, 59, 63, 97, 104, 176 182

Jacob 89, 125, 126, 191

James 50, 53, 64, 72, 75, 77, 87, 96, 103,
104, 108, 112, 113, 117,  118, 119, 120, 121,
122, 125, 126, 127, 128, 138, 143, 147,
148, 149, 150, 151, 160, 166, 168, 171,
185, 188, 189, 190,  192, 193, 194, 195,
197, 198, 200

Jone 6, 37, 38, 51, 53, 57, 104, 108, 188, 191

Jannet 13, 15, 21, 43, 49

Jasper 191

Jay 181

Jefferson 66, 146

Jemina 144, 150

Jenifer 145, 148, 152, 153

Jenna 161

Jesse 77

Jinnie 182

Joanna 44

John 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 30,  31, 33, 37, 38,
39, 40, 43, 45, 46, 48, 60, 69, 73, 74, 75,
76, 80,  83, 87, 88, 89, 90, 95, 97, 99, 100,
103, 109, 119, 123, 124,  125, 127, 133, 134,
136, 137, 138, 141, 142, 143, 147, 152,  154,
156, 160, 161, 164, 168, 175, 181, 186, 187,
188, 189,  190, 191, 192, 194, 195, 196, 197,
198, 201, 203

John Bragg 77, 78, 79

John Bryan 116, 120

John Henry 32, 46, 48, 77, 101, 116, 119

John Jenifer 152, 153, 156, 157

John Nathan 54, 55, 57, 106, 107, 109, 110,
114, 115

John Warren 22, 36

John Weems 66, 67, 73

Jonathan 191

Joseph 18, 21, 22, 31, 32, 34, 36, 41, 102,
125, 148, 160, 181, 185,  197, 198, 201, 203

Josephine 175

Joshua 125, 126, 201, 203

Josiah 30, 82, 83, 84, 85, 89, 91, 92, 97, 98,
117, 194

Judith 86

Julia 40, 41, 116, 126, 160, 175, 193

Juliana 160

Katie 193

Kenneth 42, 45, 80

Legertie 162

La Rue 181, 182

Laura 44, 72, 117, 194

Lavon 79

Lawrence 104

Leander 192

Leland 48

Lemuel 37, 38, 44

Leon 183

Leonard 10, 87, 95, 102, 129

Leslie 47

Lester 162, 181

Lestine 44

Letitia 77, 110, 139, 144, 147

Lettie 109, 113, 114

Levi 146

Lewis 40, 69, 70, 75, 88, 120

Loften 190

Lorena 161

Lorenzo 197

Lorinda 38

Lottie 104

Louise 49, 93, 190, 192, 195

Loula 119

Lovick 193

Lovie 44 


Smoot (cont.): 

Lucinda 97, 115, 190

Lucretia 125

Lucy 37, 45, 70, 78, 119, 143, 146, 147

Luke 43, 47

Luther 33, 42

Lyda 162

Lydia 11, 13, 33, 100

Lyman 194

Macky 138, 139

Maggie 146

Malissa 38

Martishia 144

Marvin 169, 171

Mattie 147, 169

Malinda 99

Maranda 192

Marcelia 191

Margaret 9, 25, 37, 41, 67, 72, 73, 100,
102, 109, 150, 154, 158, 171,  172, 180, 191

Margaretta 82

Maria 69, 72, 108, 112, 116, 118

Marie 98

Marshall 192

Martha 40, 79, 91, 94, 101, 103, 146, 147,
178, 184, 191, 192

Mary 6, 13, 15, 21, 22, 26, 30, 34, 36, 37,
38, 40, 41, 46, 54, 57, 62,  64, 67, 77, 82,
85, 87, 91, 93, 94, 101, 102, 105, 106, 107,
109,  114, 117, 124, 126, 127, 130, 133, 138,
139, 141, 143, 144,  147, 150, 156, 157, 158,
160, 161, 164, 166, 170, 171, 179,  186, 187,
190, 192, 193, 194

Mary Anne 16, 45, 91, 116, 185, 189

Mary Magdaline 13, 14, 23

Matilda 38, 42, 68, 191, 195

Matthew 65, 66, 185

Maurine 178

Maxine 48

Melissa 44

Merrill 47

Middleton 70, 71, 72, 76

Mildred 48

Millie 76, 135

Milton 181

Mina 194

Minerva 40

Minnie 45, 77

Minor 126

Minty 160

Mollie 193

Nancy 43, 72, 73, 86, 89, 125, 143, 147,
151, 155, 163, 173, 175, 191,  192, 193

Nannie 91

Narcissa 99

Nathan 166, 168, 169, 194, 197

Neely 169

Nellie 162

Newell 47

Noel 147

Norma 183

Norman 38, 103

Notley 64, 69, 73

Octavia 37

Olive 173

Oliver 201

Oma 162

Ora 127

Orson 174, 177

Otho 78, 80

Otis 77, 194

Paulina 191

Peregrine 66, 175, 181

Perry 46, 48, 80, 181

Peter 45, 201, 203

Philip 30, 61, 62, 68, 69, 75, 195, 198, 201, 203

Phillipine 175

Philo 77

Phoebe 71, 76, 78

Pinkney 201

Pleasant 147

Polk 195

Polly 84, 89, 160

Posthuma 11

Priscilla 125, 154

Rachel 54, 84, 85

Ralph 47, 128

Ray 127

Rebecca 35, 44, 49, 89, 91, 157, 158, 166, 183,
191, 192, 194

Reed 144, 146, 174, 178, 179, 183

Reuben 69, 74, 147, 192

Rezin 86, 87, 93, 94

Richard 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 48, 53, 70, 91, 105, 109,
115, 118, 119, 129, 130,  132, 156, 159, 160,
178, 182, 193, 201

Richmond 100, 104

Robert 40, 48, 74, 102, 116, 143, 161, 178, 185,
190, 195, 197, 201

Roger 38, 49, 80

Roland 180

Rosa 33

Rosalie 76

Rosannah 19, 20

Roselle 121, 161

Roy 181

Rulian 160

Rulon 178, 180

Ruth 182

Rutherford 46

Salem 192

Sally 74, 92

Samelda 194

Samuel 15, 16, 19, 32, 33, 41, 42, 59, 82, 83,
84, 85, 86, 89, 90, 91, 93,  97, 98, 99, 100,
101, 126, 152, 153, 156, 158, 160, 183, 185,
190, 192, 193, 197, 202

Samuel Jenifer 157, 158

Sandy 196

Sara Ellen 23 
 216

Smoot (cont.): 

Sarah 12, 16, 17, 35, 38, 40, 43, 56, 59, 60,
68, 78, 97, 101, 121, 126,  127, 133, 141, 147,
151, 160, 168, 175, 190, 191, 192, 195

Saralda 194

Sebersa 195

Seth 183

Silas 202

Silbyl 122

Sinclair 192, 202

Solomon 125, 126

Sophia 114, 160, 193, 194

Stanley 48, 178, 183

Stephen 116, 182, 192

Sterling 45, 47

Stringer 129

Sue Ella 119

Susannah 25, 28, 39, 58, 61, 62, 66, 72, 108,
109, 113, 116, 118, 119, 121,  125, 129, 130,
138, 149, 158, 193, 194

Sylvester 26, 37, 38

Tabitha 191

Temperance 166, 167, 168

Thaddeus 97, 104

Theophilus 94, 101, 102, 145, 148

Thomas 3, 8, 12, 14, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 26,
29, 35, 38, 43, 46, 50, 51, 52,  53, 54, 
55, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61,  64, 65, 66, 67, 
69, 72, 74, 82, 83, 85, 90, 97, 99, 106, 123, 132, 
133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 144, 147, 148, 149, 150,
152, 154, 156,  158, 159, 161, 163, 164, 171, 185,
188, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194,  195, 196, 198, 202

Thomas Barton 86, 87, 92, 93, 101

Thornton 40

Tomsen 87, 95

Trinvilla 192

Truston 47

Vera 182

Vermilla 180

Vianna 147

Vilate 173

Violetta 115, 118

Virginia 32, 48, 103, 170

Walker 126, 186, 198

Walter 70, 71, 76, 77, 93, 105, 110, 114, 127, 162,
169, 186, 187

Warner 103, 105

Warren 146, 198

Wendell 177, 183

Wilkes 58, 61, 67

Willord 77, 79

Willis 203

Wilmot 160

William 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 25, 29, 30, 32,
34, 35, 38, 40, 41, 43, 44, 46,  47, 49, 50, 51,
52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 59, 63, 64, 65, 66, 69, 70, 71,
72, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 87, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94,
100, 101, 103,  109, 110, 111, 114, 115, 116, 117,
120, 123, 125, 126, 130, 132,  133, 135, 137, 138,
143, 144, 146, 147, 152, 153, 154, 155, 157,
160, 161, 163, 169, 170, 175, 178, 181, 185,
187, 189, 190, 191,  192, 193, 196, 197, 198, 202, 203

William Barton 57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 66, 67, 73, 106,
107, 109, 110, 111

William Cochrane 175, 180

William Groves 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 26

William Payne 96, 103

William Read 138, 141, 144

Willoughby 67

Wilson 108, 109, 111, 115, 118, 175, 198, 203

Winfield 102

Winifred 12, 29, 30, 133

Winyann 27

Woodville 192, 198

Wyatt 196

Wyley 191, 202, 203

Zella 178

Zina 172 


Sneed, Charles 13 

Snell, Alexandrina 177 

Snow, John 124

Mary 124 

Solomon, Thomas 108 

Sorensen, Anna 174 

Sothoron, Harriet 110, 116 

Sparklin, Walter 44 

Speiden, Elizabeth 187

Margaret 187 

Spelman, Alice 45

David 45

Jane 45

John 45

Kenneth 45 

Stallings, Elizabeth 160 

Stanley, Margaret 142 

Steel, Maggie 169 

Stemm, John 72 

Stephens, Althea 76

Mary 135 

Stevens, Reva 182 

Stevenson, Frank 45

Hugh 27, 28 

Stillman, William 153 

Stimton, Solomon 124 

Stine, Annibel 154

Benjamin 154 

Stoddert, Benjam
in 13, 113

Sobina 13 

Stone, Elizabeth 54

John 54; 196

Matthe
w 54

Velma 81

William 53, 107 

Stonestreet, Mary 86

Nicholas 118 

Stott, Anne 135

Leroy 134 

Stout, John 162 

Strother, Jeremiah 189 

Stroud, Richard 155 

Stubbs, Edna 174, 177 

Stull, John 186 

Sullivan, Charles 190 

Sutphin
, 
Minnie 77 

Swann, Elhannah 26 


Tabbs, Abigail 61, 67

Barton 68

Edward 91

Eleanor 58

Lettice 91

Mary 58, 67

Susannah 58

Theophilus 21, 58

Thomas 67 


217


Taney, Thomas 54 

Tatum, Jesse 90 

Taylor, Alice 179

Anna 174

Aurelia 36

Elmina 174

Ethel 174

George 174

Hazel 174

John 36

Mares 117

Miriam 174

Thomas 8 

Terrell, John 185 

Terrett, Emily 33, 41 

Thomas, Benjamin 60

Eliza 144, 146

George 11

Henry 146

John 11, 39

Mary 11, 139

Philip 11

Samuel 166

Sarah 139, 146

Tyre 11

William 139 

Thompkinson, Giles 7 

Thompson, Frederick 151, 163

Sarah 151 

Thomson, Alfred 119

Susan 119 

Thornton, Charles 142

George 142

John 188

Lucy 142

Lydia 188

Margaret 142

Reuben 188 

Threlkeld, John 186

Joseph 64 

Tilghman, Catherine 37

Fanny 37 

Tincher, Virginia 128 

Tippen, James 13 

Tippett, Avie 102

Uriah 139 

Todd, Thomas 44 

Tompkins, John 20 

Townsend, Mary 16 

Triplett, Francis 96 

Trout, Annis 170

Brittingham 170

Mary 152, 156

Robert 170 

Truman, Benjamin 188

Jane 57

Thomas 57 

Tull, Jessie 13 

Turner, Alexander 166, 168

Diana 178

James 178

John 166, 168

Joseph 166, 168

Laura 166

Mary 166

Shirley 178 

Turpin, Elizabeth 30

Francis 30, 31

George 30

Gulia 30

John 30

Mary 30

Priscilla 30, 36

William 30 

Tyler, Martha 33

Mary 78

Walter 114

William 78, 113 

Tyre, James 52

Rebecca 52, 82 


Uhler, Catherine 117, 121

Charles 121

Frank 121

John 117

Rebecca 121 

Upperman, Eliza 42 


Vanderlandinggham, Betty 135 

Vaughan, Nancy 189

Samuel 85 

Veale, John 133 

Vedder, Caroline 48 

Vickers, Elisha 96

Nancy 96

Ora 162 

Vincent, Catherine 26

William 26 

Vogt, Mary 175 


Waggaman, Elizabeth 33

Henry 17, 33

John Floyd 33

John

Henry 33

Martha 33

Mary 33

Samuel 33

Thomas Eunalls 33 

Waghop, John 3 

Wakefield, Abel 11, 62

Mary 62

Thomas 11 

Walker, Alma 97, 104

Henry 149

James 9

Margaret 180

Thomas 135

William 150

Winifred 16, 29 

Wall, Alexander 90

Garrett 90

John 105 105

Lura 105

Lydia 90

Mary 90 

Wallace, Ebenezer 144 

Walter, Anne 70

William 70 

Ward, Caroline 115

Daniel 65, 66

Susan 186

Ulysses 186 

Wardeen, Matthew 11 

Ware, Edward 61 

Waring, Alexander 23

Bartlett 23

Belle 23

Cora 23

Joseph 23

Marion 23

Mary 23

Moses 23, 24 

Warren, Anne 21

Eleanor 9

Elizabeth 13, 21

Humphrey 7, 8, 9, 52, 53, 132

John 10, 21

Margarey 7 

Waters, Anne 187

Elizabeth 154, 159

James 82

John 85, 90, 130

Mary 130

Sylvia 130

Thomas 86

Walter 85 

Watson, Minnie 169, 170 

Watts, Anne 58

Barton 58

Elizabeth 57

Hannah 58

Henry 136

Joshua 58

Sarah 57

Susannah 58, 62, 67

William 57, 58 

Way, Davenport 29, 30

John 29

Richard 29 

Webb, Adelaide 174

Caleb 155 

Weedon, Elizabeth 123 

Weems, Charles 109

Elizabeth 109, 110

Francis 109

George 109

James 109

John 109, 110, Lock 109

Mary 109

Sarah 109

Walter 109

William 109 

Welch, John 156

Richard 104 

Wells, Charles 112 

Weston, Mary 117

William 117 

Wheat, Robert 119 

Wheatley, Dale 49

Emaline 46

Ezekiel 32

Jesse 47

Margaret 47

Priestley 44

Rebecca 43, 47 

Wherritt, Abner 58

Eleanor 58

William 58 

Whichaley, Thomas 54 

Whitacre, Harriet 89, 97 

White, Margaret 116

Narnole 136

Tunsel 136 

Whitney, Albert 173

Charles 173

Emily 173

Heber 173

Helen 173

Horace 173

Margaret 173

Orson 172

Paul 173

Virginia 173 

Wilder, Benjamin 185

John 10, 13, 16, 53, 54, 123 

Wilkins, Susan 77 

Williams, Edward 127

Gay 127

Julia 104

Samuel 190

Thomas 135 

Willingham, Lucy 159, 161 

Wilson, Bessie 47, 49

Ezekiel 49

Louise 49

Matilda 140

Susannah 107, 109 

Wisecarver, Bridget 188

Harman 188 

Wismal, Eliza 24 

Witcherly, James 52 

Witten, Eleanor 156, 161

Thomas 161 

Wolfs, Curtis 47 


 218


Wood, Elizabeth 3

Frances 119, 121

Grace 3

Jack 76

James 84

Letitia 76

Montague 76 

Woodstock, A. S. 25

Benjamin 25

Frances 25

Helen 25

Mary 25 

Worthen, Phyllis 177

Sarah 175, 181 

Wright, Lovira 40

Mary 5

Phoebe 75, 78

Virginia 127

William 78 

Wrilly, Edward 5 


Yager, Briscoe 121

Edward 121

Ellie 121

James 121

Julia 121

Margaret 121

Thomas 121

Waller 121 

Yates, Henry 94

Rebecca 52

Robert 52, 54, 123, 133 

Young, Charles 142

Isaac 154

John 156

Margaret 154

Salla 142

Thomas 13, 154 


Zinn, Rosalie 162 

